# POSITIVE EXAMPLES (AGING THEORY PAPERS)
# Total papers: 24
# Exported: /Users/diana/Documents/projects/paper_patterns

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1007/s10522-015-9584-x
================================================================================

TITLE: Complex systems dynamics in aging: new evidence, continuing questions

ABSTRACT: There have long been suggestions that aging is tightly linked to the complex dynamics of the physiological systems that maintain homeostasis, and in particular to dysregulation of regulatory networks of molecules. This review synthesizes recent work that is starting to provide evidence for the importance of such complex systems dynamics in aging. There is now clear evidence that physiological dysregulation--the gradual breakdown in the capacity of complex regulatory networks to maintain homeostasis--is an emergent property of these regulatory networks, and that it plays an important role in aging. It can be measured simply using small numbers of biomarkers. Additionally, there are indications of the importance during aging of emergent physiological processes, functional processes that cannot be easily understood through clear metabolic pathways, but can nonetheless be precisely quantified and studied. The overall role of such complex systems dynamics in aging remains an important open question, and to understand it future studies will need to distinguish and integrate related aspects of aging research, including multi-factorial theories of aging, systems biology, bioinformatics, network approaches, robustness, and loss of complexity.

FULL TEXT:

[Introduction]
Twenty-five years ago, Medvedev (1990) outlined more than 300 mechanistic theories of aging. The question then, and the question now, was what to make of this diversity of theories. Is one theory right to the exclusion of all others? Do many mechanisms operate simultaneously? Are some mechanisms downstream and others upstream, such that we might identify one or a few key upstream mechanisms? Do the mechanisms interact with each other, and if so, how?

To some extent, we have answers to some of these questions. For example, very few researchers would now contend that there is a single aging mechanism, though some still argue principally for one central mechanism (Barja 2014). There is both theoretical and empirical evidence for interactions among mechanisms (Kowald and Kirkwood 1996; Ludlow et al. 2014). However, we are still far from a general consensus on a big-picture theory for how mechanisms interact to cause aging (Kirkwood 2011).

One integrative theory proposes a breakdown in interactions within the complex regulatory networks that maintain homeostasis (Ferrucci 2005; Fried et al. 2005). This idea has been around in various forms for a long time, and has many names: homeostenosis (Taffett 2003), allostatic load (Karlamangla et al. 2002; McEwen 1998), and physiological dysregulation (Seplaki et al. 2005). Loss of complexity during aging is a related idea that has also been developed in detail (Lipsitz 2004; Lipsitz and Goldberger 1992; Manor and Lipsitz 2013). These ideas are attractive, and have garnered a fair amount of support, particularly among clinical aging researchers, though they are less familiar to some researchers focused on the molecular mechanisms of aging. However, the challenge has been to accumulate evidence for the importance of such complex systems dynamics in aging. Precisely because the systems are complex, they can be hard to measure. For example, measurement of allostatic load has been questioned as circular (Singer et al. 2004).

Over the last several years, my lab has been working to find ways to test for the presence and importance of complex systems dynamics in aging. We have been doing so at the organism level, and using a particular model of physiological organization. Our approach to complex systems dynamics is described in substantial detail below; briefly, I define complex systems dynamics as changes in the state of complex regulatory networks of molecules that (a) arise due to the structure of regulatory relationships within the network, such as through feedback loops, that (b) cannot be easily understood via simple maps of network structure (i.e., that represent emergent properties of the system), and that (c) may be sensitive to the precise structure of the network and to perturbations in it. Complex systems dynamics might be implicated in aging via a breakdown in the regulatory dynamics (“dysregulation”), through intricate feedback effects among aging mechanisms, or perhaps through other mechanisms, as I will show.

The objective of this article is to summarize our recent findings in an integrative way, and to relate them to the broader literature on complex systems and aging. I thus start with an overview of different ways that complexity has been discussed in the context of aging biology. I continue with a summary of our model of physiological organization, including the evidence we have generated for two particular types of complex systems dynamics: emergent physiological processes (EPPs) and physiological dysregulation. Lastly, I integrate our findings into the larger literature and summarize outstanding questions.



[Approaches to complexity in aging]
West and Bergman (2009) proposed an expanded role for systems biology and complexity in aging, but there are many directions this could take, and a lack of clear terminology sometimes leads to confusion. It is important to distinguish complex system dynamics (our approach, detailed in the next section), multi-factorial theories of aging (Kirkwood 2005), systems biology and bioinformatics of aging more generally (de Magalhães and Toussaint 2004; Kirkwood 2011; Soltow et al. 2010), system-level robustness in aging (Kriete 2013), and loss of complexity in aging (Lipsitz 2004; Lipsitz and Goldberger 1992). Each of these research directions provides a critical piece of the puzzle on complexity in aging, and long-term it will be important to integrate them, and perhaps others.

Multi-factorial theories of aging posit simply that aging has many causes (Weinert and Timiras 2003); most aging researchers today would subscribe to this idea at some level. Aging could be multi-factorial but not involve complex system dynamics. For example, there could be a number of different mechanisms that cause damage accumulation, each proceeding largely independently. Even if there are a few specific feedback effects among the mechanisms (e.g. Kowald and Kirkwood 1996), it is not a foregone conclusion that there would be complex system dynamics. The disposable soma theory and related mechanistic theories based on the accumulation of damage, wear and tear, etc. are multi-factorial but do not necessarily imply complex system dynamics (Kirkwood 2005). In fact, the evolutionary mechanisms referred to in the disposable soma theory imply that complex systems dynamics are not central to aging: if they were, aging would likely evolve based on regulatory constraints in complex networks, rather than based on a large number of small trade-offs of things like energy allocation (Cohen Accepted). The distinction between multi-factorial theories and complex systems theories may thus also be important for inferring how aging evolved (see also Kriete 2013; Wensink et al. 2014).

While aging might be multi-factorial but without complex systems dynamics, the reverse is unlikely to be true. Complex systems explanations imply interactions among sub-networks, and it is nearly certain that this would involve complex feedback loops where problems in one system cause problems in another, etc. (Fried et al. 2009; Govindaraju et al. 2014). Multiple systems would thus be implicated in aging, and dysregulatory processes could be started or accelerated from many parts of the network. Furthermore, even if complex system dynamics are important in aging, they are unlikely to be the sole factor. For example, a trade-off between risk of cancer and regenerative capacity appears to be involved in aging (Park et al. 2004). This is likely largely independent of complex systems dynamics.

The complex systems dynamics approach I take fits solidly within a larger systems biology perspective as outlined by Kitano (2002), in which four key features are studied: structure, dynamics, control, and design. I would add function as a fifth feature: what does the system achieve for the organism? In this view, an integrated approach to these features is necessary, though it will not always be possible to conduct research that covers all features. For example, our approach integrates dynamics and function through an understanding of design principles, but there is little emphasis on control or structure. In contrast, Kirkwood (2011) puts an emphasis on computer modeling of dynamics based on detailed knowledge of structure, but does not accord particular importance to higher-order properties of the system. Kriete et al. (2010), (2011) take a similar approach, though higher-order properties have a larger role.

From a different angle, an increasing number of studies are working to map networks (Csermely and Sőti 2006; Hoffman et al. 2014; Xue et al. 2007) and thus establish structure without particular regard to the other features listed. This is part of a more general tendency to use high-throughput technologies to generate and integrate large amounts of data on aging (e.g. de Magalhães et al. 2009; de Magalhães and Toussaint 2004), though such approaches may not really fall within Kitano’s framework for systems biology, absent a link to dynamics, control etc. For example, weighted correlated gene network analysis can take large volumes of biological data and organize it into sub-networks based on the correlations among the molecules. Each sub-network can then be summarized to generate a signal of activity (Langfelder and Horvath 2008; Zhang and Horvath 2005). Such an analysis is very powerful, and can be used for multiple purposes, including an understanding of dynamics as well as for other objectives that may fall outside systems biology. Obviously, the importance of these studies is not determined by whether they can be called “systems biology.” There is a role for all these approaches, including bioinformatics, network analyses, structural maps, computer simulations of network dynamics, and our statistical integration to understand functional dynamics. Nonetheless, imprecision with terms such as complexity, systems, and network, combined with methodological overlap, can sometimes obscure the fact that these approaches pose distinct and complementary biological questions.

One of the largest challenges with network approaches to aging is the precision needed in order to successfully understand network dynamics (Pearson et al. 2013). In theory, we might build a map of how every molecule relates to every other molecule and then use differential equations to model system behaviour. In practice, we are likely decades away from even identifying all the molecules, much less understanding their dynamic relationships, and it is hard to imagine we will ever have computers powerful enough to run such models. Precisely because the networks are complex dynamic systems, the consequences of missing or slightly erroneous information in network construction are difficult to infer and could be large (Gutenkunst et al. 2007). For example, Fig. 1 shows the very different outcomes in a simple 3-molecule control network based on linear versus logistic functions describing relationships. Fuzzy logic and appropriate sensitivity analyses may partially circumvent such concerns, at least at the cellular level (Kriete et al. 2010). Nonetheless, efforts to understand network function may also require top-down approaches (Pearson et al. 2013), such as those used in our research.Fig. 1Linear and logistic relationships among molecules can produce vastly different functional dynamics in the system. Results are based on a simple simulation of three molecules, A, B, and C, in which A up-regulates B, B up-regulates C, and C down-regulates A. Over 1000 time steps, linear dynamics produce a highly unstable, fluctuating system, whereas logistic dynamics produce a more stable system. Accordingly, it is not necessarily possible to predict the dynamics of a complex system based solely on a map of what regulates what, without a detailed understanding of the functional forms of the regulatory dynamics

One of the most exciting new directions in complexity in aging research comes from the literature on how robustness is achieved in complex systems (Carlson and Doyle 2000). Robustness is a “property that allows a system to maintain its functions against internal and external perturbations” (Kitano 2007). Following on this literature, Kriete (2013) suggests that in highly optimized systems overall robustness is zero-sum, such that a gain in a certain type of robustness causes a fragility elsewhere. He uses this principle to suggest that evolution of robustness implies the evolution of trade-offs, and thus that aging may be a side effect of other aspects of evolutionary optimization given the specific system-level constraints in complex systems such as organisms. Such an understanding of robustness also integrates well with our understanding of hormetic responses to stress during aging (Rattan 2008).

Lastly, loss of complexity during aging is a specific hypothesis that reflects an understanding of an organism as a complex system (Lipsitz 2004; Lipsitz and Goldberger 1992). Loss of complexity posits that an organism is a sufficiently sophisticated entity that, when in good health and functioning well, it will exhibit fractal patterns and chaotic or complex patterns of structrure and change. Some of this complexity diminishes during the aging process, presumably indicating that the organism is losing the capacity to control the multi-dimensional, conditional, and dynamic processes underlying the complexity. Loss of complexity is not necessarily based on a network of molecular interactions. In fact, the primary examples of loss of complexity are traits such as heart rate variability and branching structure of vessels (Lipsitz and Goldberger 1992), traits that are not well explained through a network understanding of organisms. Loss of complexity may at least partly explain or characterize aging, and it may influence or be influenced by aspects of complex system dynamics.



[Complex systems dynamics and physiological organization]
Most research on physiological regulation today proceeds molecule by molecule. The basis of this reductionist approach is the idea that if we can understand the role of each molecule in regulating other molecules and being regulated by them, we will be able to understand how physiological systems or entire organisms function. This approach is not without merit—many successful pharmaceutical products have been developed by understanding molecular interactions and developing compounds to intervene in these interactions. However, most potential pharmaceutical products never pan out, and many that do are found to have unexpected side-effects, short or long-term (Ahn et al. 2006; Jüni et al. 2004). Though it would be a mistake to put too much emphasis on the reductionist-holist distinction (Kirkwood 2011), this reflects certain limits of a purely reductionist approach.

To understand why this is, we need a coherent model of how physiological systems are structured and how they evolve. A starting point is the raison d’être of these systems: they exist to help organisms maintain homeostasis, and to adjust this homeostasis as necessary in response to changing environmental conditions or internal physiological conditions (Cohen et al. 2012; Kitano 2007; Kriete 2013). The term “homeostasis” is imperfect in this context, given that organisms are dynamic entities in constant flux. Here, I do use the term homeostasis, but with a broad conception that what is static is not the state of the molecules, but that the organism is maintained in or adjusted to whatever physiological state may best serve its interests at the moment. This is consistent with its original definition (Cannon 1932), despite later criticism. Organisms achieve homeostasis through robustness to perturbations (Kitano 2007). For example, our diet changes slightly from day to day; it would not do for small changes in intake of vitamins, phytoestrogens, etc. to cause major shifts in physiological state. At the same time, physiological state does need to change in coherent ways—for example, to enter a breeding state, to digest a meal, to mount a stress response, or with circadian rhythms. Organisms thus need physiological systems that are largely robust to minor perturbations, and that can make coherent shifts in physiological state as necessary. Moreover, if a problem arises in the regulation, there is no external force that can intervene to restore homeostasis. Accordingly, both robustness and desired shifts in physiological state must result directly from the organization of molecules in a regulatory network.

At the level of the organism, I call these “physiological regulatory networks” (PRNs, Fig. 2) (Cohen et al. 2012). Within an organism, all biologically active molecules can be considered part of a single large PRN. Figure 2 is a simple caricature – there are hundreds if not thousands of sub-networks, and many molecules have yet to be discovered. The key point of the figure is the structure of regulation: it is not simply hierarchical (from the top down), but also bottom-up and with substantial direct cross-talk among systems. For example, vitamin E has important roles in both maintaining oxidative balance and in the immune system (Chew 1995). The bottom-up effects and cross-talk create feedback loops, a key structural feature of networks that helps them maintain homeostasis (e.g. through negative feedback) or shift physiological states (e.g. through positive feedback) (Cinquin and Demongeot 2002; Wiener 1961). Another key structural feature of PRNs is redundancy (Kitano 2002). Redundancy helps ensure that problems in one small part of the PRN can be contained, and thus that the PRN is not overly sensitive to minor perturbations.Fig. 2A simplified, partial schematic of a physiological regulatory network (PRN). Red arrows indicate top-down control, such as steroid hormone modulation of immune function. Purple arrows indicate feedback effects, such as antioxidant effects on glucocorticoids. Light-blue arrows indicate direct interactions among subnetworks, such as immune regulation by dietary antioxidants. Green arrows indicate direct effects of the environment on subnetworks, such as content of antioxidants in the diet. Yellow arrows indicate environmental regulation of integrators, usually via the central nervous system (CNS). System-level properties of the PRN exist at different levels, including state within individuals (e.g. dysregulation) and species-level structure (modularity). Likewise, phenotype can include individual- or species-level traits (e.g. health and evolvability, respectively). Modularity is determined by the proportion of potential light-blue arrows present; interconnectedness by the total number of arrows relative to molecules; and robustness by the density of purple arrows resulting in negative feedback effects. The particular structure of connections, as well as their strengths and interactions, will determine how the PRN responds at an individual level and evolves at the species level in response to a changing environment. Adapted from Cohen et al. (2012)

These structural features mean that PRNs can be formally considered complex dynamic systems (Holland 1992; Kier and Witten 2005), much like weather systems and ecological networks (e.g. Dunne et al. 2002). However, PRNs have one key difference from many other complex systems: they have been shaped by natural selection for a specific purpose, i.e. to maximize organismal fitness (Cohen et al. 2012). Even undirected networks such as weather systems and ecological networks can demonstrate coherent structure; this is a result of self-organizing properties that can emerge in complex systems (Kauffman 1993). But in PRNs and other biochemical networks this organization should be particularly clear and should relate directly to traits that influence fitness.

Indeed, what we know about PRN structure strongly supports this model. While some molecules may play key roles coordinating function across systems (integrators, Fig. 2) (Martin et al. 2011), PRN function is relatively robust to perturbations in levels of these integrators. For example, polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are endocrine disruptors that have been shown in animal models to be able to disrupt growth processes by mimicking thyroid hormones (Suvorov et al. 2008; Zhou et al. 2001). Nonetheless, in human epidemiological data there is no evidence for an effect of PBDEs on growth rates. Increased PBDE levels result in decreased thyroid levels (Abdelouahab et al. 2013), but no change in birth weight (Y. Serme and A.A. Cohen, unpubished data). This suggests that thyroid hormone production decreases as a response to PBDEs, and that up to a certain point PBDEs simply replace thyroid hormone. Only when levels are particularly high or other factors contribute does major physiological disruption occur. This is a good example of how control of PRNs is diffuse: only rarely does a single molecule exert exhaustive control over a process, and often redundancy and feedback combine to assure a functional stability. Additional support for this is seen in the failure of many gene knockouts to produce major changes in phenotype (Barbaric et al. 2007).

The model of physiological organization outlined here is not revolutionary—in fact, most of its elements can be found in introductory biology courses, to say nothing of systems biology textbooks and reviews (Kitano 2002; Klipp et al. 2005). Nonetheless, its consequences are important. It suggests that the best way to understand physiological system state is neither by using single molecules to describe system state, nor by creating an exhaustive map of all molecules and their relationships. Rather, key aspects of system state might be measured with small numbers of molecules, and the precise choice of molecules might not be that important, because system state is a diffuse property of the network as a whole. Any single molecule might measure this state with a large amount of error, but as the number of molecules increases so does the signal, with diminishing returns for each additional molecule. This is encouraging: it implies that with relatively simple multivariate statistics applied to small numbers of markers (<50) we may be able to decode how PRNs are structured and to measure the state of an individual. This model also suggests that complex systems dynamics may be key to understanding aging, i.e., that aging may be to some degree an emergent property of PRN function. We wanted to understand to what extent these kinds of dynamics are important in physiology generally, and in aging specifically.



[Emergent physiological processes - Overview]
The general framework just described suggests that physiology may be organized in part around what I call EPPs. An EPP is a process controlling a key aspect of regulation through dynamic interactions among large numbers of molecules in a way that cannot be easily understood by mapping the direct regulatory relationships among the molecules. Emergence in physiological systems is generally discussed in terms of emergent properties: robustness, modularity, etc. However, there is good theoretical reason to suspect that emergence can occur for processes as well as for properties. Unlike emergent properties, which can often be measured in a standardized way across different types of networks, emergent processes are specific to the functional objectives of a given network. For example, both ecological networks and physiological networks might be highly modular (a property), but it makes no sense to discuss regulation of systemic inflammation (a process) in an ecological network.

The concept of EPPs has not, to my knowledge, been previously described in a way specific to physiological regulation, though in complex systems theory more generally the existence of such processes was predicted over 20 years ago by Kauffman (1993). Kauffman used simulations to show that complex dynamic systems can have clear attractor states related to attractor basins: within a multivariate state space, there exist a number of distinct regions within which regulatory networks cause a dynamic process that leads the system state to converge on a single point, such that even though the number of starting points may be enormous, there are a limited number of convergence points to which the system tends. This is the equivalent of the tendency of water to flow to the lowest point in a drainage basin: the number of local valley bottoms is limited, even on a large landscape. (The analogy breaks down due the presence of water bodies such as rivers and lakes that stop the descent.) The idea of attractor states fits well with the general model of physiological regulation above because these states are likely to correspond to key situations organisms encounter, such as shifts between breeding and non-breeding states.

Of course not all states that organisms need to arrive at are discrete, and it is not hard to develop a conceptual generalization of the attractor state model to incorporate continuous variation in an organism’s physiological state. Aging is a good example of this. Many aging-related changes in physiology are likely adaptations to other aging-related changes, adaptations that minimize the impact of aging on the organism. Such adaptation likely needs to be continuous rather than discrete, and the analogy would thus be to attractor “trenches,” where there is not a single point to which physiology converges, but rather a series of points along a continuous axis. The system will be able to converge to different points along this axis in response to some additional control factor. Note that this axis or trench could align with many physiological parameters to reflect the continuous adjustment of many different aspects of physiology in a coordinated fashion.

As mentioned above, if control of which state an organism is in depends too heavily on any single parameter, the organism is at substantial risk of a regulatory error should that parameter become abnormal for any reason. Accordingly, we should expect that control of shifts among attractor basins occurs in a more sophisticated way involving feedback loops and redundancy across many parameters. This would reflect selection for PRN structures that increase robustness to common problems while decreasing robustness to rare problems (Kriete 2013).

Putting all this together, we should expect that shifts among attractor states and/or along attractor trenches would often be regulated by complex feedback mechanisms occurring among many molecules, and that mapping the regulatory pathways of the molecules would not necessarily give us clear insight into what the attractor states/trenches are nor into how those shifts result from the regulatory pathways. Obviously, we neither expect nor observe that such complex mechanisms are the only mechanisms of physiological control. For example, insulin signaling controls glucose metabolism in a rather straightforward way, and complex systems theory is not necessary to explain the functional significance of this pathway. Nonetheless, almost all research into physiological regulation to date has been conducted as if all key processes can be detected in the same way as insulin signaling, and there is good reason to believe that EPPs might exist and might control numerous important processes for maintaining and adjusting homeostasis.



[Emergent physiological processes - Evidence]
Some of our recent findings provide the first clear empirical support for the existence of EPPs. In full disclosure, we did not predict the existence of EPPs and then confirm this empirically, but rather obtained unexpected results and developed the concept of EPPs as the most coherent explanation for these findings. The principal result was the detection of unexpected yet highly stable associations among a number of biomarkers (Cohen et al. 2015b). We had used the statistical method principal components analysis (see “Principal Components Analysis (PCA)”) to try to understand links among 43 common clinical biomarkers during aging from the Women’s Health and Aging Study (WHAS), expecting to be able to simplify our dataset into summary measures of known systems. Instead, the most important axis (i.e., PCA 1) cut across traditional classifications of biomarkers, associating particularly strongly with those relating to anemia, protein transport, inflammation, and calcium. Thinking we had perhaps made an error or that our result was due to random processes in the data, we replicated it in two additional datasets, InCHIANTI and the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging (BLSA), as well as in multiple demographic subsets of each dataset (male/female, black/white, younger/older, etc.). In each case we were able to faithfully replicate the axis, with versions calculated from different datasets and subsets generally producing scores correlated at r > 0.9, often >0.95.



[Emergent physiological processes - Principal Components Analysis (PCA)]
Principal components analysis (PCA) is a data reduction method that can be used to condense a large number of redundant variables into a smaller number of independent variables. While PCA is a standard method, it has a rarely appreciated potential to identify underlying processes structuring the data (e.g. Cohen et al. 2010). For example, if we applied PCA to a data set of thousands of individuals for whom we measured 100 morphologic traits (height, weight, arm length, leg length, waist circumference, nose width, etc.), we would expect to be able to greatly simplify the dataset. Arm length, leg length, and height are tightly correlated and thus largely redundant. We thus might expect the first composite variable (“axis”) generated by the analysis to be an overall measure of size, positively associated with all our measures. The second axis might be a measure of skinniness/obesity, with measures like height, arm length and leg length juxtaposed against measures like waist circumference, arm circumference, weight, etc. We would likely have several other important axes as well. These axes would provide a useful summary of the data: 5–10 variables is easier to manage than 100. But critically they would also provide insight into the biological processes determining morphology. If a certain gene controls aspects of development that cause nose width and finger circumference to covary, this would show up in our axes. If fat composition in the diet systematically affects where fat is deposited, this will also show up in our axes. Careful interpretation of PCA axes can thus yield important substantive insight into underlying processes structuring the data.

It was clear that the physiological axis we had detected in WHAS, InCHIANTI, and BLSA represented some underlying process structuring the correlations among the biomarkers in a consistent way across populations and sub-populations, but it was not yet clear if this process was biologically interesting. We replicated the analyses after controlling each biomarker for age and obtained the same signal again, confirming that we were not measuring some proxy for age. We tested for an association with hepcidin, a recently discovered hormone thought to be important in regulation of some of the systems associated with our process (Nemeth et al. 2004), but the correlation was weaker than for most of the individual biomarkers used. We tested for the stability of the axis across datasets compared to the stability of the individual biomarkers, both in terms of correlations with age and correlations with each other, and showed that the axis is more stable than any of the individual biomarkers. At this point, we concluded that the most likely explanation for the process we detected is that it represents an axis of physiological regulation integrating multiple systems, and that appears to function outside the direct regulatory control of any single molecule or pathway. We noted that it appears to increase exponentially with age, and that it predicts mortality and clinical frailty (but not chronic diseases) after controlling for age. In other words, it appears to be an EPP that is implicated in aging but not chronic diseases.

While the process we detected, which we call “integrated albunemia” (PCA1, no relation to albuminenia), appears to be a clear example of an EPP, it is not the only likely example. The second axis from the same analysis appears to represent metabolic syndrome based on strong associations with lipids, glucose, and inflammation (Cohen et al. 2015b). Metabolic syndrome (Grundy et al. 2004) fits the definition of an EPP presented above. Likewise, inflamm-aging (a suite of changes in inflammatory regulation with age, Franceschi et al. 2000) appears to represent another EPP. In another recent study, we showed that inflamm-aging is characterized not simply by up-regulation of pro-inflammatory markers, but by simultaneous up-regulation of both pro- and anti-inflammatory markers, suggesting that it represents a coherent shift in system state rather than a clear outcome of a simple regulatory pathway (Morrisette-Thomas et al. 2014).

All three of these examples of potential EPPs are still tentative, in that we cannot definitively exclude the possibility of simple molecular control mechanisms, nor of other potential explanations. Nonetheless, for the reasons listed above, there is good reason to suspect that EPPs might exist, and these examples appear to exhibit the predicted properties. Interestingly, all three represent either pathological changes in system state or adaptations to pathological changes (it is not easy to distinguish which). Nonetheless, there is no reason to suspect that EPPs would be limited to progression of aging-related pathologies; indeed, we would predict that if EPPs are a common feature of physiological organization, they should also exist to help organisms transition along “attractor trenches” even when no point along the trench represents a more pathological state than any other.



[Physiological dysregulation - Overview]
The second major branch of our research has focused on quantifying physiological dysregulation. In some sense, physiological dysregulation during aging is trivial: clearly, many aspects of physiology and regulation function less well during the aging process. However, we use the term in a more restricted and less trivial sense, referring specifically to a gradual and generally irreversible loss of regulatory control originating from structural instabilities in regulatory networks. All complex systems have some tolerance limits to changing conditions. For example, there exist temperatures, blood glucose levels, etc. that are simply and immediately fatal for an organism. As mentioned above, highly optimized complex systems have generally evolved to tolerate as wide a range of common conditions as possible, while remaining frail/susceptible when faced with more abnormal conditions (Kriete 2013). The question is, what happens when a system/organism is pulled slightly outside its optimal tolerance range? Does it either die immediately, or survive as if nothing happened? Or does it survive, but with its overall system state slightly modified and unable to fully return to complete homeostasis? If this latter possibility exists (and it is by no means clear it does), that would be what I call physiological dysregulation. Note that this model does not necessarily imply that aging/dysregulation could be avoided simply by maintaining perfect conditions, because organisms may not have perfect tolerance for the varying internal conditions that they will inevitably undergo during their life course.

Unlike with EPPs, we hypothesized a priori that physiological dysregulation is a major driver of the aging process, perhaps even largely sufficient in some cases to explain most of aging as we know it. We thus set out to find ways to detect a signal of physiological dysregulation. We started with the Anna Karenina principle: “All happy families are happy in the same way, but each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” Taking the analogy to physiology, all well-regulated systems are relatively similar, but there are a multitude of ways in which things can go wrong. This analogy was first proposed to me by Arun Karlamangla. Using this principle, we hypothesized that individuals with a normal biomarker profile should generally be healthier and younger than those with an abnormal profile.



[Physiological dysregulation - Evidence]
In order to measure how normal a profile is, we applied a measure of statistical distance. Statistical distance is a way to quantify how different a vector of values (e.g. a biomarker profile) is from some standard profile. Specifically, we used the Mahalanobis distance (DM) as a measure of how normal or abnormal an individual’s overall biomarker profile is (Cohen et al. 2013; Mahalanobis 1936). Because biomarkers are correlated, it is not possible to evaluate how unusual a profile is based solely on how unusual each biomarker is. For example, it is about equally rare for adults in the US to be 194 cm tall or 140 cm tall, but the combination of 140 cm with 133 kg is much rarer than the combination of 194 cm with 133 kg (Fig. 3a). Similar principles apply to biomarkers (Fig. 3b). Standard clinical and research approaches to biomarkers consider them one at a time, but DM provides a simple way to adjust for their joint probability distribution. We hypothesized that, under the PRN model above, having an abnormal or unusual biomarker profile as measured by DM would be a sign of physiological dysregulation (i.e., deviation from homeostasis), and that physiological dysregulation in turn was important in aging. We made a number of specific predictions to test this hypothesis:Fig. 3A general, 2-dimensional example of Mahalanobis distance (DM) based 30,000 + adults in the NHANES dataset. a gives the relationship between height and weight (an intuitive example), and b between total cholesterol and vitamin E (two biomarkers in our data sets). The correlations between these variables are r = 0.45 and 0.54, respectively. The concentric ellipses represent, from inside to outside, ellipses that should contain 0, 10, 50, 80, 95, and 99 % of the observations, based on the combination of the correlation, means, and standard deviations. DM here reflects how rare any height-weight or cholesterol-vitamin E combination is, and thus has an equal value for all points on the same ellipse, as indicated in red. Because DM incorporates the correlation into the calculation, it reflects the fact that certain combinations may be more unusual than expected based solely on how rare the values are separately. For example in a, the point in the upper left (height = 140 cm, weight = 133 kg) has a DM of 6.64, substantially higher than DM = 5.24 for the point on the 99 % ellipse in the upper right (height = 194 cm, weight = 133 kg) despite the fact that heights of 140 and 194 cm are equally rare in the population (99.6th percentile). Accordingly, DM correctly reflects the fact that it is much rarer to be short and heavy than tall and heavy. In practice, DM applies this principle to large numbers of variables simultaneously, though visualization is hard beyond two dimensionsDM should increase with age.High DM should be associated with higher mortality and adverse health outcomes, controlling for age.The signal of DM should increase as more markers are used to calculate it, but with diminishing returns for each additional marker.The precise choice of markers should not matter too much, as long as they are broadly representative of the system or organism in question.The signal of DM should increase if the “normal” profile is calculated based on a relatively young, healthy sub-population.These results should be broadly replicable and stable across populations and species.

Indeed, we can now confirm all of these quite convincingly using data on 44 common clinical biomarkers from the same aging cohort studies mentioned above in the PCA analyses (Cohen et al. 2013, 2014, 2015a; Milot et al. 2014a, b). DM increases with age, probably exponentially, and the curves are consistent across WHAS, BLSA, and InCHIANTI (Fig. 4; Milot et al. 2014b). A very different group of markers gives a very similar pattern in a fourth cohort study, NuAge, based in Quebec (unpublished data). DM predicts mortality and clinical frailty after control for age. It is also associated with a number of chronic disease measures—very consistently with total number of comorbidities and heart disease, somewhat less consistently with diabetes, and only rarely for cancer (Cohen et al. 2014, 2015a; Milot et al. 2014b).Fig. 4Estimated trajectories of log-DM with age at the population (solid black line) and individual (dotted lines) levels for the InCHIANTI cohort based on quadratic Bayesian multi-level models. These models estimate an overall (population) quadratic function for change in DM with age, as well as individual deviations from this function. Each individual’s trajectory is estimated with substantial error, but overall estimates of the heterogeneity of trajectories are robust with the sample sizes available. Individual trajectories are shown for ten individuals selected randomly in the dataset as an example. Inference is based on statistical distance of 43 common clinical biomarkers (albumin, glucose, cholesterol, etc.) measured in 1022 individuals aged 21–96, with up to four visits per individual. While individual heterogeneity in level and rate of change in DM is significant, the general trend toward increasing and accelerating DM with age is also clear. More complete analyses and details are available in Milot et al. (2014b)

Many of our analyses have been replicated across a very large number of biomarker combinations. Our initial analyses used a group of 14 markers identified through a statistical selection procedure, and were replicated on every combination of these 14, i.e. 16 383 combinations (Cohen et al. 2013), (2014). We then used the full set of 44, testing 5000 random combinations for each possible number between 1 and 44, or all combinations when less than 5000 existed (Cohen et al. 2015a). We consistently found that including more markers produced a stronger signal, but with diminishing returns, as predicted. We showed that two mutually exclusive groups of biomarkers still tended to produce DMs that correlated relatively well (r = 0.4–0.5 when n = 20 per group). There was moderate heterogeneity in results across combinations: for example some predicted one outcome more strongly, others another. Nonetheless, the general tendencies were consistent. Few enough combinations were associated with cancer that this could be due solely to sampling processes and false positives; cardiovascular disease was almost always positively associated with DM, though sometimes not significantly depending on the combination.

In addition to validating these results in four human datasets, we applied the same technique to a dataset on 11 biomarkers measured monthly in 32 captive red knots (Calidris canutus), a shorebird (Milot et al. 2014a). DM was clearly predictive of the two health/performance measures available, a foot inflammation score (positive association) and maximum aerobic capacity (negative association). The 11 biomarkers had already been measured for other reasons, showing that the principal can be applied to biomarkers chosen more-or-less randomly.

Lastly, we have recently shown that DM can be calculated not just globally, at the organism level, but also meaningfully for distinct physiological systems (Li et al. in press). DM calculated based on biomarkers for lipid, electrolyte, oxygen transport, vitamin, liver function, and white blood cell types showed the same traits as global DM, but DM in each system was only weakly correlated with DM in the others after control for age. This suggests that dysregulation may proceed largely independently within each system, but with the potential for feedback effects such that a global level can also be meaningfully measured. This result is crucial for our ability to take inference about dysregulation to a finer biological scale than the whole organism, and suggests a long-term direction for understanding how lower-order processes produce higher-order ones during aging.

It is surprising that our results so consistently and strongly confirm the utility of DM as a measure of dysregulation, given how crude the measure is. It requires us to assume (a) that the ideal biomarker profile is the average profile; (b) that this ideal profile is identical for all individuals at all ages, sexes, and physiological states, and (c) that the distribution of profiles in biomarker space is multivariate normal. All three of these assumptions are clearly false, and may sometimes not even be approximately true. We are working on better ways to estimate of the centroid (i.e., optimal profile) and to relax the supposition of multivariate normality (e.g. Ekström 2011; Liu et al. 1999). The fact that DM works well despite the crudeness of these assumptions suggests that the true signal (i.e., the signal we would detect with an optimal method) is very strong and biologically important.

Taken together, these results show that DM does measure physiological dysregulation as an emergent property of system state, and that physiological dysregulation is an important part of the aging process. They do not, however, show whether dysregulation is a primary cause of aging or a result of other, upstream processes. The robustness to choice of biomarkers is strong enough to confirm the general physiological model proposed, but weak enough to imply that greater detail of specific processes will be important to incorporate going forward.



[Discussion]
Overall, our research to date provides convincing but not yet ironclad evidence for a role of complex systems dynamics in aging. Our findings on integrated albunemia, metabolic syndrome, and inflamm-aging are highly consistent with EPPs, and thus suggest a model of physiology in which function is not necessarily determined through distinct, clearly decipherable molecular pathways, but also through complex interactions among large numbers of molecules, at least in some cases. For all three potential EPPs discussed here higher scores indicate worse health. This may indicate that they are pathological processes, or that they are adaptive responses to other changes in system state with age, or a combination of the two. However, there may also be other EPPs that are not involved in aging at all, and that help organisms control transitions among key physiological states.

Likewise, physiological dysregulation appears to be a separate type of complex systems dynamic involved in aging. When we began our study, it was not clear whether more-or-less random combinations of 10–15 common biomarkers could provide a coherent signal of overall system state. Many of these markers are not themselves correlated with age in any consistent way (Cohen et al. 2015b). Our findings thus provide clear support for a specific definition of physiological dysregulation: as a gradual inability of physiological systems to return to a baseline (e.g. homeostatic) state due to complex interactions at the system-level. Obviously, there is no single optimal physiological state to which all organisms attempt to return (Kitano 2007); the optimal state must shift with conditions, and substantial work remains to outline how dysregulation measures interact with an organism’s changing physiological needs. However, this limitation makes it all the more surprising that we do consistently find that a simple measure of how aberrant a biomarker profile is consistently predicts everything we would expect from a measure of biological age (Klemera and Doubal 2006; Levine 2013). Despite this, I would take a cautious approach relating DM to biological age. The semi-independent dysregulation in different systems we find means that there is no single, universal definition of biological age. Biological aging is likely multi-dimensional, and this is reflected in the imperfect correlations among DM generated from different biomarker combinations.

It would appear that our analyses present the first clear demonstration of generalized physiological dysregulation as a system-level property during aging. This finding is unsurprising, given a number of excellent previous studies. For example, Fried et al. (2009) showed non-linear changes in biomarkers across systems during aging. Govindaraju et al. (2014) showed complex interactions among markers of cardiac function during aging. Arbeev et al. (2011) showed that individual biomarkers exhibit a loss of homeostatic dynamics during aging. Yashin et al. (2010) showed that dynamics of biomarkers during aging may be at least as important as static levels. Dan Belsky (pers. comm.) showed that changes in biomarker profiles characteristic of aging start early, at least by the 30 s in humans. Southworth et al. (2009) showed that gene expression profiles in mice become increasingly uncorrelated with age.

Physiological dysregulation as we detect it is consistent with many of the more clinical conceptualizations related to homeostasis (Ferrucci 2005; Fried et al. 2005; Seplaki et al. 2005). In particular, some of the mathematical properties of the robustness to biomarker choice resemble those of the frailty index (Howlett et al. 2014; Searle et al. 2008) and suggest that DM may be detecting the frailty process well before it reaches clinical manifestations. This idea is somewhat at odds with the idea of integrated albunemia as the basis of frailty, and considerable work remains to identify which if either of these processes is more important in frailty’s etiology, or even whether frailty represents a coherent biological process.

Our work has various links to the other approaches to complexity in aging outlined above. Complex systems dynamics such as we detect do not contradict the possibility for more additive, multi-factorial processes (Kirkwood 2005; Weinert and Timiras 2003). The underlying model of physiology is quite similar to the model of cellular regulation supposed by Kriete (2013) in describing the role of robustness in aging. His approach is complementary to our approach in that it uses the principle of robustness to arrive at general insights into trade-offs and the evolution of aging; we attempt to quantify functional outputs of complex system dynamics at the individual level, with potential implications at evolutionary scales. The relationship between loss of complexity (Lipsitz 2004; Lipsitz and Goldberger 1992) and our approach to network state and dysregulation is hard to discern intuitively, and empirical studies will likely be needed to establish any links. Our results would appear to suggest that there may be both gains and losses of complexity with aging: the increases in DM we observe with age demonstrate greater variation in physiological state with age. The question then becomes, is variation in these traits equivalent to complexity? There is substantial potential for research to bridge these approaches, such as studies examining how short-term temporal variation in DM changes with age.

Most of our research to date has been at the organismal level, as has the research on physiological dysregulation more broadly and on loss of complexity. In contrast, much of the work on multi-factorial aging and on robustness focuses on cellular aging. One of the major challenges going forward is to understand how these levels interact, and whether one has primacy over the other in the aging process. One hypothesis would be that cellular aging causes organism-level physiological dysregulation, but that variation in aging across species depends on the species-level robustness of organism-level PRNs to withstand this dysregulation. The statistical approaches we have developed to measure complex system dynamics could also be applied to cellular networks, and it will be important to assess whether cellular dysregulation is linked to cellular senescence in the same way that organism-level dysregulation appears related to organismal senescence.

Overall, it is becoming increasingly clear that complexity generally, and complex network dynamics specifically, play important roles in the aging process. It remains to be seen exactly what these roles are, and to what extent other processes are important as well. I suspect but cannot yet prove that dysregulation is itself a major driver of the aging process. If this is correct, there are substantial impacts for understanding both the mechanisms and evolution of aging. Aging rates across species would be determined largely by their ability to resist dysregulation. There are also impacts for medical research on aging: if dysregulation of complex networks is a crucial aspect of aging and is universal in mammals, there is little hope that rejuvenation therapies will be able to do much more than serve as a speed bump during the aging process. Conversely, understanding how lifestyle and genetic background affect dysregulation rates may offer substantial hope for improving health span.

I have little doubt that there are other fruitful approaches to the complex systems dynamics of aging waiting to be explored. Research to date has barely scratched the surface, and a combination of recent findings and basic principles of biological organization suggest that these dynamics play an important role in structuring the aging process, both on a mechanistic and an evolutionary scale. If there is anything we have learned after decades of research on aging mechanisms, it is that there is unlikely to be any silver-bullet explanation, even if that explanation is relatively broad, such as complex systems dynamics. Nonetheless, this field remains one of the most promising and least explored aspects of aging.



MESH TERMS: Aging, Evidence-Based Medicine, Gene Expression Regulation, Humans, Metabolome, Models, Biological, Signal Transduction, Systems Biology

KEYWORDS: Aging, Emergent property, Physiological dysregulation, Principal components analysis, Statistical distance, Systems biology

AUTHORS: Alan A. Cohen

YEAR: 2015
JOURNAL: Biogerontology

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1007/s10522-024-10143-5
================================================================================

TITLE: The evolution of ageing: classic theories and emerging ideas

ABSTRACT: Ageing is generally regarded as a non-adaptive by-product of evolution. Based on this premise three classic evolutionary theories of ageing have been proposed. These theories have dominated the literature for several decades. Despite their individual nuances, the common thread which unites them is that they posit that ageing results from a decline in the intensity of natural selection with chronological age. Empirical evidence has been identified which supports each theory. However, a consensus remains to be fully established as to which theory best accounts for the evolution of ageing. A consequence of this uncertainty are counter arguments which advocate for alternative theoretical frameworks, such as those which propose an adaptive origin for ageing, senescence, or death. Given this backdrop, this review has several aims. Firstly, to briefly discuss the classic evolutionary theories. Secondly, to evaluate how evolutionary forces beyond a monotonic decrease in natural selection can affect the evolution of ageing. Thirdly, to examine alternatives to the classic theories. Finally, to introduce a pluralistic interpretation of the evolution of ageing. The basis of this pluralistic theoretical framework is the recognition that certain evolutionary ideas will be more appropriate depending on the organism, its ecological context, and its life history.

FULL TEXT:

[Introduction]
Recent years have witnessed significant attention directed towards understanding the mechanisms of ageing and its origins. Indeed, research into the basic processes of ageing is increasingly becoming an accepted pillar within mainstream biomedical research (Mc Auley et al. 2017; Morgan and Mc Auley 2020; Keshavarz et al. 2023; Marx 2024). This contrasts sharply with previous circumstances, where biogerontologists operated on the margins of biomedical science. Individuals who now opt for a career in ageing research follow pioneering work. Nowhere better exemplifies this than the evolutionary biology of ageing, a subject which some of biogerontology’s most significant trailblazers have devoted considerable time to (Comfort 1964; Partridge and Barton 1993; Rose 1994; Hayflick 1998; Kirkwood 2005; Finch 2010; Kenyon 2010). Understanding the evolution of ageing requires a knowledge of Darwinian biology. It also necessitates conceptual clarity around two key biogerontological terms, which are relevant to this critical review. The first is senescence. Many definitions of senescence exist. However, a broadly accepted view from a life-history perspective is that senescence is the physiological deterioration of an organism that results in declining survival and/or reproduction with age (Stearns 1998). The second term is ageing, which is also challenging to define. Despite this, most biogerontologists would agree that ageing is the cumulative impact of a series of deleterious biological processes which gradually renders an organism increasingly vulnerable to mortality with age (Mooney et al. 2016; López-Otín et al. 2023). It is apparent ageing and senescence are different. The reason for presenting this distinction is that in the biogerontology literature they are often conflated. In this review each will be explicitly referred to and the terms will not be used interchangeably to mean the same thing. This is particularly important when discussing evolutionary processes where changes in Darwinian fitness carry significant conceptual meaning.

Weismann first adopted Darwinian logic to understand ageing. He reasoned it evolved to remove older individuals from a population, thus freeing resources for younger group members (Weismann 1891; Kirkwood and Cremer 1982). Weismann viewed ageing as an adaptive trait beneficial to the species rather than individuals. However, evolution is now understood to act at the level of genes, not populations or individuals (Dawkins 1976; Williams 2018; Ågren 2021). The notion of ageing as an adaptive process did not die with Weisman; ideas of this nature persist (Pamplona et al. 2023). However, most theories regard ageing as a non-adaptive by-product of evolution which is due to a decline in the force of natural selection. This premise underpins the mutation accumulation (MA) (Medawar 1952), antagonistic pleiotropy (AP) (Williams 1957), and disposable soma (DS) (Kirkwood 1977) theories. These three ideas constitute the classic evolutionary models of ageing. Empirical evidence exists which supports each classic theory (Mc Auley 2021). However, it is important to note that this support is based largely on qualitative observations regarding processes such as the intensity of selection. Thus, a consensus remains to be fully established as to which theory best accounts for the evolution of ageing. This uncertainty has led to the development of arguments which advocate for alternative theoretical frameworks, some of which propose an adaptive origin for ageing, senescence, or death (Galimov and Gems 2021; Pamplona et al. 2023). Other work has critically dissected the classic theories, or attempted to reinvent/unify them (Johnson et al. 2019; Lemaître et al. 2024). In contrast this review will evaluate how mechanisms beyond a unidirectional decline in natural selection affect the evolution of ageing. Moreover, I critically examine alternatives to the classic evolutionary theories, and pay particular attention to how the concept of evolutionary entropy (EE) relates to MA, AP and DS. The review concludes by introducing a pluralistic interpretation of the evolution of ageing.



[The classic evolutionary theories of ageing]
The foundations for the classic theories were laid by Fisher and Haldane, who understood that natural selection has a stronger impact on reproduction and survival in early years than it does later in life (Fisher 1930; Haldane 1942). This concept underpins the MA theory, which suggests ageing is due to the accumulation of harmful alleles, which escape natural selection, due to only being functionally expressed post reproductively (Medawar 1952). AP is an extension of MA. It proposes that alleles have antagonistic effects, which are beneficial during early life but are detrimental in later life (Williams 1957). According to AP the positive effect on fitness of an allele outweighs its negative effect, due to the greater intensity of natural selection early in life. Formal mathematical credence was given to the idea that natural selection declines with age by Hamilton and others (Hamilton 1966; Rose 1994; Charlesworth 2000). And this principle was further used as the basis of the DS, underscoring that MA, AP and DS are not mutually exclusive concepts. However, subtle differences do distinguish DS from the other two theories. DS is a physiological idea suggesting ageing evolved as a result of the strategic partitioning of energy between somatic maintenance and reproduction (Kirkwood 1977; Kirkwood and Holliday 1979). Energy is allocated based on the life expectancy of the organism. Life expectancy is in turn moulded by parameters that influence extrinsic mortality, such as predation rate. The DS theory implicitly assumes that sufficient energy will be invested in somatic maintenance so that an organism reaches reproductive years, but it is not an optimal strategy to invest in somatic maintenance indefinitely if the rate of extrinsic mortality dictates that an organism will not live much beyond reproductive age. Conversely, intrinsic mortality is driven by life history decisions such as how much resources is allocated to reproduction.



[Empirical support for the classic ageing models]
An evolutionary theory must be evaluated based on its success in explaining observed biological phenomena. This test has been largely passed by the classic theories as they are empirically supported. It is beyond the scope of this review to discuss the evidence in depth. This has been dealt with previously (Johnson et al. 2019; Mc Auley 2021). However, it is worth mentioning some recent studies which support the classic theories. A recent investigation provided some compelling evidence for MA by demonstrating how accurate mutation accumulation rate is between diverse species (Cagan et al. 2022). Recent support for AP derives from an Apolipoprotein-ε4 (APOE-ε4) allele study (Trumble et al. 2023). APOE is crucial to lipid metabolism (Yang et al. 2023). However, the APOE-ε4 allele is associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease, increased risk of cardiovascular disease and decreased lifespan (Belloy et al. 2019). In the study by Trumble and colleagues it was observed that within a population of 795 women forager-horticulturalists (the Tsimane) those who possessed two copies of the APOE-ε4 allele gave birth to more children than women with other allele combinations. This is consistent with the idea that APOE-ε4 is an AP gene. In the case of the Tsimane an increased risk of age-related morbidity and mortality is the evolutionary cost for increased fecundity. Some recent findings consistent with DS logic derive from canine investigations. In one study a reciprocal relationship was observed between reproductive investment in dogs and their lifespan (Bargas-Galarraga et al. 2023). Further work observed an inverse relationship between life span and body size, with the authors arguing that the findings are conceptually close to DS (da Silva and Cross 2023).



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models]
As alluded to ample empirical support exists for the core elements of the classic theories. However, several conceptual and empirical challenges have emerged that question aspects of these theories. Firstly, both MA and AP treat ageing as the cumulative manifestation of late acting alleles. This is a satisfactory explanation for explaining why certain alleles are associated with age-related diseases (Byars and Voskarides 2020; Lockwood et al. 2024). However, AP and MA distil ageing to essentially a genetic problem. Unfortunately this ignores the malleability of ageing, which has been experimentally demonstrated in a wide variety of organisms (Hwangbo et al. 2020; Keshavarz et al. 2023). Some empirical evidence is also difficult to reconcile with the classic theories. For instance, MA may not be a significant cause of ageing. This is evidenced by work in saccharomyces cerevisiae which has revealed that the number of mutations which accumulate with age are of an insignificant level (Kaya et al. 2015). Moreover, in some studies when mice were genetically manipulated to have high mutation rates this did not unduly impact their lifespan (Narayanan et al. 1997). On a similar note, in some studies mice subjected to a high level of free radical induced somatic damage do not suffer from a significant reduction in lifespan (Van Remmen et al. 2003; Lapointe and Hekimi 2008). Findings which are at odds with the notion that somatic impairment drives ageing, something which is a core feature of DS. It is worth exploring in depth how some other factors present a challenge to the classic theories.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Darwinian fitness]
The classic models are built on the premise that population growth rate is the measure of Darwinian fitness (Charlesworth 2000). This parameter does not take into consideration factors such as population size and ecological constraints (Dietz 2005). This limitation has its origins in the quantitative work of Fisher and his treatment of the Euler-Lotka equation (Fisher 1930). Fisher used this equation to represent an age-structured population reproducing in continuous time. He suggested that such a group of individuals will reach an asymptotic exponential rate of population increase, which is denoted as, r. Fisher referred to r as the Malthusian parameter of the population, and he proposed it to be the key measure of Darwinian fitness (Fisher 1930; Rose 1994; Charlesworth 2000). This way of defining Darwinian fitness is the foundation of classic evolutionary thinking (Charlesworth 2000). However, the notion of r has been challenged analytically (Demetrius 2001). Based on this analytical work it is suggested that the rate at which a population returns to its original size after a random perturbation in the age-specific birth and death rates is the key determinant of Darwinian fitness (Demetrius 2001; Olshansky and Rattan 2005; Demetrius et al. 2009). It has also been suggested that the rate at which a population returns to a steady state can be quantified by a demographic parameter, denoted as EE. In other words EE quantifies variability in the age individuals reproduce (iteroparity) and die (Demetrius et al. 2009). EE was recently used to account for the diversity of ageing patterns across the tree of life (Buescu et al. 2023). Using EE as a measure of Darwinian fitness it was predicted that natural selection can be strong in both early and late life (a convex function). This contrasts sharply with the monotonic decline in natural selection which is the cornerstone of the classic theories (Flatt and Partridge 2018). This prediction is feasible as stochasticity is crucial to demographic processes, and EE is capable of representing it as a key determinant of Darwinian fitness.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Extrinsic mortality an ongoing debate]
A central tenet of the classic theories is that an increase in extrinsic mortality results in the evolution of a faster ageing rate (Caswell 2007; Dańko et al. 2018). In fact, the close coupling of extrinsic mortality with life-span variation has been consistently observed throughout nature (Reznick et al. 2002, 2004). Moreover, differences in extrinsic mortality are suggested to account for lifespan plasticity among diverse species (Wilkinson and South 2002). A common example is birds where key features of their behaviour, and life history are associated with reduced extrinsic mortality rates, when compared to mammals of a similar size (Holmes and Austad 1994, 1995; Wasser and Sherman 2010). An explanation for this phenomenon is that birds have a decreased rate of ageing compared to similar sized mammals, as flight lowers their predation rate (Pomeroy 1990). Similarly, it has been suggested that arboreality offers a protected environment which abrogates predation exposure, reducing extrinsic mortality and favouring the evolution of increased lifespan (Shattuck and Williams 2010). Indeed, protective phenotypes (e.g. tortoise shells, arboreality, fossoriality etc.) were recently identified as key determinants of lifespan in tetrapods, in particular they were highlighted as particularly important to the evolution of longevity in bats, birds and naked mole rats. (Shilovsky et al. 2024).

It is crucial to note that a reduction in predation has not been universally observed to result in decreased ageing in all organisms (Pietrzak et al. 2020). Moreover, despite the empirical observations theoretical work has suggested that under certain conditions a higher rate of extrinsic mortality results in the evolution of slower senescence (Abrams 1993; Williams and Day 2003; André and Rousset 2020). Moreover, it has been argued that for extrinsic mortality to impact senescence it needs to do it in an age dependent way (Moorad et al. 2019). Although this notion has been strongly contested (Day and Abrams 2020). Despite this it is acknowledged that in certain species population density dependence introduces an additional layer of complexity which makes determining how extrinsic mortality influences senescence particularly challenging (Day and Abrams 2020). This line of thinking is supported by recent thought-provoking work which convincingly argues that the effects of extrinsic mortality are closely tied to density dependence (de Vries et al. 2023). Intriguingly, this work suggested that depending on the specific circumstance a change to extrinsic mortality may not result in faster/slower lifespan. The impact of considering density dependence was further emphasised recently when mathematical modelling was used to explore MA theory using a hypothetical population. The model predicted that density-regulated populations will end up semelparous or collapse due to the accumulation of deleterious mutations (Aubier and Galipaud 2024). This finding appears to reveal an inherent weakness of classic evolutionary thinking and in particular MA.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Negligible or negative senescence]
The concept of negligible or negative senescence is based on observations in certain species which have revealed that risk of mortality may not change, or even decrease with chronological age (Finch 1994; Vaupel et al. 2004). For instance, naked mole rats display virtually no increase in mortality risk with age, possess a delayed ageing phenotype throughout their life-span, and show resistance to age associated pathologies, such as cancer (Oka et al. 2023). Moreover, in a recent investigation involving turtles and tortoises who were kept in zoos it was observed that ~ 75% of 52 species exhibit slow or negligible senescence (da Silva et al. 2022). Interestingly, however, when negative senescence was quantitatively interrogated recently using mathematical modelling, it was found that the magnitude of mortality increase has been significantly underestimated based on reported lifespans (Xia and Møller 2022). However, if the assumption is made that most observations of negligible/negative senescence are reliable, this generates a theoretical conundrum for the classic theories. Negligible/negative senescence is inconsistent with the notion that the diminishing capacity of natural selection with advancing age favours trading-off late-life fitness for early reproductive success. Although a solution may exist as to why selection does not decline with age in organisms that manifest negligible/negative senescence. Recent comparative work emphasized that population structure and reproductive value are crucial to interpreting selection gradients (Roper et al. 2021). This study revealed how growth form, individual trade-offs, stage structure and social interactions influence various distributions of population structure and reproductive value. It was contested such factors have the potential to help understand why patterns of negligible/negative senescence could be accounted for under the same evolutionary models as ‘normal’ senescence.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Sexual selection and ageing patterns]
Sexual selection influences natural selection. This impacts the classic theories because they are built on the assumption that ageing evolved under natural selection. However, unlike natural selection which results from differential fecundity and survival, sexual selection is the outcome of variance in mating/fertilization success (Trivers 1985; Rowe and Rundle 2021). Typically the strength of sexual selection is stronger in males than females (Borgia 1985; Emlen et al. 2005; Clutton-Brock 2007; Dakin and Montgomerie 2013). Moreover, in certain organism’s males invest less in generating offspring than females (Trivers 2017). In theory this means males can direct additional resources to attracting females. Moreover, females can then choose a mate based on the effort’s males direct towards their sexual fitness (Shuker and Kvarnemo 2021). This may necessitate a male reproductive strategy which deals with inter-male rivalry/conflict (Le Boeuf 1974; Simmons and Emlen 2006).

In many species sexual selection mediates how males and females senesce (Carranza et al. 2004; Gasparini et al. 2019). Indeed in several species males that invest more strongly in traits which help them win conflicts, or which make them more attractive to females benefit from increased reproductive success (Bagchi et al. 2021). The drawback is that male reproductive strategies can be associated with an increased risk of extrinsic mortality, and thus a shorter lifespan (Bonduriansky et al. 2008). Indeed, in certain species male-male competition for early reproductive success can result in differential rates of senescence (Preston et al. 2011). Males may also possess traits that make them more attractive to females as their age increases (Lifjeld et al. 2022). Such instances potentially lead to the selection of alleles which favour male fitness and longevity (Brooks and Kemp 2001).

Female lifespan is also influenced by sexual selection. For instance, females may evolve ornamental features to attract a suitable mate. Such ornamentation requires resource investment which may influence female life-history schedules (Potti et al. 2013). Moreover, females can evolve sexual features which directly influence their longevity (Møller 1993). Of course, sexual conflict may also impact the evolutionary relationship between males and females. Sexual selection can ‘drive’ a male trait beyond its naturally selected optima (Hosken and House 2011). This demonstrates that sexual selection can antagonistically oppose natural selection (Kirkpatrick 1982). Female fitness can also be impacted by male sexual selection which in turn can influence their lifespan. For instance, female Drosophila melanogaster which possess longer sperm receptacles (SR) have shorter lifespans (Miller and Pitnick 2003). This is thought to be a result of sexual conflict mediated by ejaculate toxicity. More recent work has found that male and female flies which possess giant sperm and long SR genotypes have increased longevity (Zajitschek et al. 2019). Examples also exist in many species, including humans, where certain females prefer to mate with older males (Côté and Hunte 1993; Kokko and Lindström 1996; Brooks and Kemp 2001; Conroy-Beam and Buss 2019). This phenomenon could exist because older males have proven their capacity to survive, and provide females with access to resources (Kokko and Lindström 1996). Thus, sexual selection can drive a pro-longevity phenotype. However, an evolutionary cost can be associated with mating with older males. Recent epigenetic inheritance studies have observed that mating with an older male can lower female fecundity and reduce offspring fitness (Mc Auley 2023). Such observations add further intrigue to interpreting the eco-evolutionary dynamics of sexual selection and its relationship with the classic ageing theories.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Genetic drift and gene flow]
Genetic drift, founder effects, and gene flow are important evolutionary forces that have contributed significantly to evolution (Simon and Coop 2024). Genetic drift is recognised as one way in which isolated human populations such as those in Okinawa and elsewhere may have developed extreme longevity phenotypes (Bendjilali et al. 2014). However, genetic drift is not universally associated with the evolution of longevity phenotypes. In Daphnia magna, it has been observed that genetic drift is synonymous with an increased ageing rate and a reduction in lifespan (Lohr et al. 2014). Of course, genetic drift intersects with other evolutionary forces such as sexual and natural selection. Species who practice sexual polygamy are suggested to be more impacted by genetic drift (Charlesworth 2009). Moreover, longevity in polygamous species could be counteracted by the persistence of deleterious alleles which are maintained by sexual selection because of their benefit to the other sex (Arnqvist and Rowe 2005). Gene flow into a population can oppose gene frequency changes; conversely it introduces genetic variation, which is the substrate for evolution by natural selection (Lenormand 2002). However, restricting gene flow out of a population has evolutionary benefits. A narrow niche breadth (NB) increases the likelihood of fixing beneficial alleles, reduces the frequency of deleterious alleles drifting to fixation, and diminishes mutation load (Whitlock 1996). However, interestingly from the perspective of the classic theories an increase in population density can result in a decrease in NB (Nicholson et al. 2006), while changes to NB can impact lifespan (Roff 2002; Jervis et al. 2007).



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - The effects of dietary restriction]
Empirical evidence in a range of organisms over the last number of decades has identified dietary restriction (DR) as a robust intervention for extending both health-span and lifespan in many model organisms (Duan et al. 2024). It remains unknown how the effects of DR reconcile with the classic theories (Moatt et al. 2020). What is known however is that a key feature of the classic theories is that they are underpinned by a trade-off between survival and reproduction. This trade-off has been used as the basis of an evolutionary explanation for the pro-longevity effects of DR. It is parsimoniously suggested that there is a metabolic shift towards somatic maintenance at the expense of reproduction (Kirkwood and Shanley 2005). This idea is known as the resource reallocation hypothesis (RRH), and it is theoretically underpinned by DS (Shanley and Kirkwood 2000). Evidence exists which is consistent with the RHH (Mc Auley 2022). However, the intricacies of this relationship are not completely clear. This is evidenced by a recent study which found that fasting increased investment in the soma of zebrafish upon refeeding at the expense of gamete quality (Ivimey-Cook et al. 2023). Other, studies have suggested that during DR in some organisms the trade-off between survival and reproduction can be uncoupled by altering the intake of different dietary nutrients such as cholesterol, amino acids, and carbohydrates (Grandison et al. 2009; Zanco et al. 2021). This has led to alternative evolutionary ideas to RHH (Adler and Bonduriansky 2014; Speakman 2020). A further conceptual puzzle for RHH centres on studies which have shown that DR can have inter- (one generation) or trans-generational (multi-generational) effects on survival and fitness (Ivimey-Cook et al. 2021; Camilleri et al. 2024; Jimenez-Gonzalez et al. 2024). Thus, DR and its intersection with epigenetic inheritance have yet to be satisfactorily reconciled with the classic theories.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Can non-genetic inheritance be reconciled with ageing evolutionary theory?]
Biogerontology is being significantly influenced by progress in epigenetics (Mc Auley et al. 2018; Morgan et al. 2018, 2020; Larson et al. 2019; Zagkos et al. 2021; Seale et al. 2022; Phyo et al. 2024). DNA methylation (DNAm) clocks have necessitated a revaluation of the proximate causes of ageing (Horvath 2013; Zheng et al. 2024). Moreover, emerging findings from epigenetic inheritance (EI) studies have stimulated debate about the ultimate cause of ageing (Woodhouse and Ashe 2020; Ghai and Kader 2022). EI implies that non-genetic mechanism(s) could influence evolution. It must be emphasized however, that EI is controversial; and it remains to be fully established as to how it reconciles with Darwinian theory let alone the classic evolutionary models of ageing. Some recent work did however, address this burgeoning theoretical conundrum (Mc Auley 2023). It was broadly concluded that the examples of EI and its impact on offspring longevity mainly derive from canonical organisms such as worms and flies. Furthermore, some evidence was highlighted that implies epigenetic patterns can be transmitted to gametes from the soma. Although, it is important to reiterate that the evidence for EI and its potential role in the evolution of ageing is very much an open question for biogerontology despite the emergence of some intriguing recent findings.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Social modulation of ageing evolution]
The concept of inclusive fitness (IF) helps explain social behaviour from an evolutionary perspective (Hamilton 1964). Arguably, however, IF has yet to be fully reconciled with the classic evolutionary theories. Indeed, when Hamilton predicted that the force of natural selection decreases with age, this work did not include IF (Hamilton 1966). Rather the model included general fitness as a parameter and did not consider IF as a contributor to the moulding of senescence. This omission is significant because arguably the 1964 work of Hamilton is the foundation which is used to support the main premise of the classic theories. Consequently the classic theories are deficient at describing how species-specific ageing patterns evolve in social organisms (Korb and Heinze 2021). A central issue is that in certain species sociality is associated with a reversal of the suggested trade-off between longevity and fecundity which features prominently in classic thinking about how ageing rates evolve (Page and Peng 2001; Blacher et al. 2017; Cohen et al. 2020).

Social populations experience age-associated selective pressures which act on social phenotypes. For instance, in certain species later-life reproductive senescence is suggested to be due solely to the effect of population composition (Rodrigues 2018). Such findings make reconciling sociality with the classic theories problematic. However, some worthwhile attempts have been made to integrate sociality with the classic theories. Ideas have primarily focused on eusocial organisms such as termites, wasps, ants, bees, and naked mole rats (Bourke 2007; Lucas and Keller 2020; Korb and Heinze 2021). Using the specialized morphological castes which is synonymous with these animals it has been argued that unlike workers, queens are shielded from external dangers, consequently natural selection optimizes their fitness into advanced age (Keller and Genoud 1997; Rueppell et al. 2015). Some evidence for this concept derives from the termite Reticulitermes speratus, where it has been observed that workers suffer from greater oxidative damage than queens (Tasaki et al. 2018). This phenomenon may not hold for all eusocial species, as queens and workers in naked mole rats do not display significant differences in lifespan, even if queens have been determined to have a slower epigenetic age (Horvath et al. 2022). However, another way to reconcile eusocial insects with the classic evolutionary theories centres on viewing them as a superorganism. According to this idea infertile workers are deemed ‘disposable’ (akin to a soma), because of their decreased lifespan, while the queen is viewed as the germline because she is protected (Rascón et al. 2012). However, insect species such as Temnothorax rugatulus exhibit caste plasticity, whereby workers who become fertile express genes which increase their lifespan (Negroni et al. 2021). Thus, the superorganism analogy does not align with the behaviour of all eusocial species.

Mathematical modelling has been used to examine sociality. One study predicted that restricted dispersal and social interactions indirectly produces AP patterns which affects survival and fecundity at different ages (Ronce and Promislow 2010). Another model was based on the assumption that AP mutations operate within or between castes (Kreider et al. 2021). According to this framework antagonistic effects originated due to caste antagonism, or indirectly due to genetic influences between castes. The model predicted that mutations with antagonistic fitness effects within castes reduced the lifespan of both castes. In between caste mutations decreased worker lifespan to a greater extent than queens. It was concluded this undermines the role extrinsic mortality has been afforded in the caste‐specific ageing of eusocial organisms. It was also posited that AP effects castes differentially due to reproductive monopolization by queens. Other work investigated cooperative breeding and ageing (Kreider et al. 2022). Cooperative breeders do not have castes. They temporarily forgo reproduction to become helpers. Simulations predicted natural selection favours delaying senescence in cooperative breeders. It was reasoned they delay age of first reproduction because helpers wait to become a breeder. It was also predicted that reduced genetic relatedness causes the evolution of longer lifespans. This was explained as selection being weaker against higher mortality when death decreases competition for breeding between relatives.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Intergenerational resource transfer]
Intergenerational resource transfer could influence the evolution of ageing. This phenomenon is not part of the classic theories. However, a solid rationale exists for its inclusion, as intergenerational transfers of adult surplus, information, and pedagogy can indirectly contribute to offspring fitness (Gurven et al. 2012; Davison and Gurven 2022). Modelling has also proved useful at exploring this phenomenon (Lee 2003). In a recent study it was used to represent transfers between age classes as the per capita net contribution of all helpful or harmful social behaviours (Roper et al. 2023). By embedding this theoretical adjunct to a model of IF it was revealed that the force of selection on age-specific reproduction does not always decline monotonically from birth, but instead depends on the balance of costs and benefits of increasing reproduction to both direct and indirect fitness.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Stochasticity and the evolution of ageing]
It is possible that stochasticity has influenced the evolution of ageing (Mc Auley and Mooney 2015). This is underscored by recent work which concluded that individual variability was responsible for different ageing patterns in the long-tailed tit Aegithalos caudatus (Roper et al. 2022). Further work emphasises how stochasticity can influence the evolution of differences in lifespan. It was observed that genetically identical female Drosophila melanogaster that live long, where found to produce long lived daughters, but generated less offspring (Drake and Simons 2023). It was suggested this was due to an apparent trade-off which was solely the result of stochastic effects. It was also suggested that trade-offs such as the one between reproduction, and lifespan may be less widespread than predicted by evolutionary biology of ageing and may instead stem from stochasticity rather than the partitioning of investment between reproduction and somatic maintenance. Fluctuations in the environment also effect evolution. Phenotypic plasticity is the evolutionary adaptation which allows an organism to respond to environmental heterogeneity (Kawecki and Stearns 1993; McHugh and Burke 2022). Phenotypic plasticity is also known to effect longevity in animals (Borges 2009). This makes sense because an inflexibility genome is not very useful, particularly if an animal lives in a fine-grained environment.



[Conceptual and empirical challenges to the classic models - Do the classic theories account for senescence in bacteria and plants?]
The classic theories provide satisfactory arguments for the evolution of ageing and age-related disease in eukaryotic, iteroparous species. Arguably however, they do not account for senescence in plants and bacteria. This could be significant because some evidence suggests plant senescence has its origins within programmed cell death which is a feature of primaeval unicellular photoautotrophs (Bhattacharjee et al. 2024). Plant senescence is generally regarded to be programmed and the mechanistic underpinning of this phenomenon requires elucidation (Thomas et al. 2009; Thomas 2013). Likewise, the evolution of ageing in bacteria needs further exploration. This assertion is consolidated by experimental work which suggests bacteria are a worthwhile comparative model for studying ageing (Florea 2017; Łapińska et al. 2019; Steiner 2021). For instance, some bacteria exhibit a trade-off between survival and proliferation in a subtle balancing act between reproduction and longevity (Abram et al. 2021). This is similar to the trade-off for resources some higher organisms devote to reproduction/growth versus that allocated for cellular maintenance, which is central to the DS theory (Hammers et al. 2013). Bacteria can also undergo programmed cell death, during nutritional stress (Nyström 2003). Thus, it is possible ageing may have evolved differently in bacteria from other species, nonetheless it is worth examining it, if only for comparative reasons.



[Alternative evolutionary ideas - Gerontogenes, vitagenes and homeodynamics]
Many alternatives to the classic paradigms exist. Some ideas have persisted while others have not. Recently it was argued Weismann’s idea was “mostly correct”, and it is only necessary to reconsider how adaptive ageing originated (Melkikh 2023). Such arguments are perhaps unsurprising given empirical data continues to emerge from canonical organisms, which make this line of thinking conceptually attractive (Kern et al. 2023). For instance, it has been argued that adapted death has evolved in certain organisms which display a high degree of relatedness (Galimov and Gems 2021). Similarly it has been suggested that ageing can be positively selected when kin selection and directional selection are closely coupled (Szilágyi et al. 2023). Another recent proposal theorized ageing evolved due to selection reducing the environmental risk of death (Omholt and Kirkwood 2021). It was posited natural selection could create this adaptation, by using a genetic programme that ensures somatic maintenance remains low.

Theories of programmed ageing depend on the selection of genes for senescence. Clearly such ideas run counter current to the general consensus that ageing is a non-adaptive by product of evolution. However, this does not mean genes aren’t involved in the regulation of senescence, despite not being directly selected for the purpose of ageing. Rattan refers to these genes as virtual gerontogenes (Rattan 1985). To understand how gerontogenes fit with evolutionary theory it is necessary to introduce the essential lifespan (ELS) of a species. ELS is the time needed by a species to grow, develop, mature and reproduce (Rattan 2018). Accordingy to this framework evolution has selected for longevity assurance genes (LAGs) that determine the ELS of a species (Rattan 2018). It is suggested gerontogenes are vital for maintaining germ line continuity as hypothesised by both AP and the DS theories (Rattan 1995).Crucially, Rattan eloquently and convincingly emphasises that it is important not to conflate gerontogenes with genes associated with the heritability of lifespan, such as those described in twin studies, those attributed to premature ageing syndromes, or those genes which have been identified in canonical organisms that result in extended life-span (Rattan 2024). The key point being is that it cannot be convincingly argued that these are gerontogenes which were selected by evolution to cause ageing or death (Rattan 2024).

It is vital to acknowledge that ageing is likely to be an emergent property of a species. Within this line of thinking, ageing can be viewed as a complex network of LAGs. Rattan refers to these as vitagenes (Rattan 1998). The concept of vitagenes also relies on homeodynamics. Homeodynamics attempts to bridge the gap between physics and biology (Yates 1994). It stipulates that biological processes are in a state of dynamic equilibrium, constantly undergoing flux. Adaptation and flexibility are key to homeodynamics, ensuring effective responses to perturbations. Homeodynamics involves non-linear mechanisms where small perturbations can lead to significant changes involving non intuitive, multilevel, feedback processes which give rise to emergent behaviour. Pathways considered part of homeodynamics, centre on maintenance processes, including those involved in DNA repair, heat shock, antioxidant defence, apoptosis, and removal of protein damage. It is theorized optimal homeodynamics is essential for an organism's growth, development, and maturation (Rattan 2018). According to Rattan the homeodynamic property of a biological system is a function of the vitagene network (Rattan 1998). It acts as a longevity assurance process which is moulded by the evolutionary history of the species(Rattan 2007). Homeodynamic space is an extension of this idea, it includes both adaptive homeostasis, and allostasis (Rattan 2007). Homeodynamic space emphasizes the importance to survival and longevity of stress response induced maintenance and repair, damage regulation rate, and immune remodelling, which are defined by the evolutionary history of the organism.



[Alternative evolutionary ideas - Quasi programmed theories which centre on growth]
It has been proposed that ageing evolved due to a quasi-programme which is underpinned by growth which extends into adulthood. This has been referred to as the hyperfunction theory (HFT) (Blagosklonny 2006; Gems 2022). According to HFT growth continues due to the hyperfunctioning of signalling pathways. This makes some sense because many species that display deterministic growth (growth to a specific adult size) have been observed to senesce, while species displaying indeterminate growth have been associated with negative senescence (Vaupel et al. 2004). The converse of hyperfunction is hypofunction. Hypofunction is speculated to occur if a developmental pathway is shut off /under expressed in later life (de Magalhães and Church 2005). Collectively hyperfunction and hypofunction have been referred to as the developmental theory of ageing (DTA) (Lemaître et al. 2024). Recently an attempt was made to unite the classic theories with DTA (Lemaître et al. 2024). It was posited that both hyperfunction and hypofunction are equally possible avenues for the evolution of ageing. Development is key some other emerging ideas. A recent hypothesis suggests evolution has a bias which is directed towards introducing innovations at the end of development (Fontana and Kyriazis 2024). Known as the evolvable soma theory it postulates that ageing is beneficial as it provides a period whereby innovations can be tested during a time where their impact on the fitness landscape is less significant. Another hypothesis which focuses on growth suggests negative senescence is a fitness neutral trait which evolved as a byproduct of a more important adaptation (Gems and Kern 2024). This is based on the notion of spandrels (Gould and Lewontin 1979; Gould 1997). It suggests AP, biological constraint and associated “quasi-programming” cause age related disease (spandrels). Indeed, other work has suggested ageing is a spandrel. A comprehensive literature survey concluded that in certain species ageing may have evolved due to a trade-off between successful land colonisation and longevity (Bilinski et al. 2021).



[Alternative evolutionary ideas - Extended phenotypes and the evolution of ageing]
The concept of an extended phenotype hypothesis as introduced by Dawkin’s, suggests an organisms’ genes exert their influence beyond their immediate biological boundaries (Dawkins 1982). An example is the gut microbiome, where it has become increasingly recognized that the microbiome is a pivotal determinant of host phenotype (Dapa et al. 2023). This reveals a key limitation of the classic theories as they do not consider how animal–microbiome interactions have influenced the evolution of ageing. This requires addressing in the future because considerable interest has been generated recently as to the role the microbiome has played in the evolution of humans and other species (Fellows Yates et al. 2021; Dapa et al. 2023). Interestingly, however there has been some speculation as to how microorganisms have influenced the evolution of ageing. An idea known as the age-distorter hypothesis (ADH), suggests that ‘age distorters, including viruses, microorganisms, or multicellular organisms affect host ageing for their own evolutionary benefit. This is an intriguing perspective given that changes to the gut microbiome/virome have been revealed to have a significant impact on the trajectory of human health (Cao et al. 2022; Salvadori and Rosso 2024).



[Towards a pluralistic view of the evolution of ageing]
It is undeniable certain challenges remain difficult to reconcile with the classic theories. One solution to this problem is to view the evolution of ageing pluralistically (Mc Auley 2022, 2023). To do this, it is necessary to understand what pluralism is. Pluralism can mean many things, however, in this context pluralism is best thought of as the acknowledgement that many different systems or approaches are appropriate for understanding complex problems (Ruthenberg and Mets 2020). Pluralism has been successfully used to reappraise the tree of life hypothesis (Doolittle and Bapteste 2007). In this context Doolittle and Bapteste define pluralism as: “the recognition that different evolutionary models and representations of relationships will be appropriate, and true, for different taxa or at different scales or for different purposes”. This definition could equally apply to the evolution of ageing. Crucially it underscores that an evolutionary model is context dependent. This perspective is inconsistent with the conventional notion that a single theory exists which can explain different patterns of ageing across all taxa. This is particularly relevant given that the intensity of ageing, and its trajectory appear to be context and taxa specific (Lemaître et al. 2020). This also applies to emerging theories. Nascent ideas contribute to the discourse on the origins of ageing, however arguing that a new theory completely supersedes the classic theories is inadvisable. Thus, this pluralistic approach does not represent a testable theory of ageing in itself but it alters the way we perceive the existing evolutionary theories of ageing, and it may provoke us to conceive different ways of exploring ageing that are not possible to do by restricting ourselves to one particular evolutionary theory. This is akin to Dawkins idea of the Necker cube (Dawkins 1982).

It is necessary to reiterate again that the pluralistic framework espoused here is not an effort to amalgamate the classic theories. It is the opposite, and contrasts with recent work which attempted to integrate the classic theories by examining resource allocation strategies across a range of taxa (Suvorov 2022). It also differs from recent work which suggests the evolutionary theories need to be expanded to better account for symbioses and interactions throughout the web of life (Bapteste et al. 2023). Indeed, there are instances where the classic theories need to be adjusted to account for scenarios, however in most instances, it should be possible to explain an observation using one of, or a combination of the classic theories. Moreover, according to this interpretation of pluralism it is unlikely that a general framework, which describes the evolution of ageing can be identified for all organisms based on the integration of several theories. This does not mean however that some generalities cannot be derived about the proximate mechanisms which regulate ageing. Indeed, some evidence exists that the mechanisms underlying exceptional longevity may be consistent across taxa (Treaster et al. 2021). Different evolutionary patterns of ageing clearly exist; thus, the question becomes what are the universal proximate drivers of senescence which might exist in all species regardless of how ageing evolved.

Figure 1 illustrates the proposed framework. Each theory has the potential to account for the evolution of ageing, however some are more suited to explaining the evolution of ageing within certain ecological contexts. It underscores that the classic theories are not mutually inclusive and may operate simultaneously or synergistically to bring about different evolutionary patterns of ageing. Thus, in most cases their expansion is not necessary, and it is merely important to recognise that one single model does not describe the evolution of ageing across the tree of life. Indeed, convincing evidence exists for the evolution of lifespan being a species specific trait (Shilovsky et al. 2022). For instance, based on the pluralistic framework outlined in Fig. 1 an explanation of primate ageing might involve different aspects of the classic theories. To this end MA and AP are well supported logical models which provide a coherent explanation as to why certain genetic polymorphisms such as APOE4 are linked with ageing, while arguably DS provides a reasonable explanation of the nexus between DR and the evolution of ageing in primates.Fig. 1The evolution of ageing: a pluralistic framework. Within this framework it is acknowledged that different models are appropriate for different taxa and depend on the ecological context. This version of pluralism also recognises the important role other disciplines, including physics and social science can contribute to our understanding of ageing

This framework also includes alternatives to the classic theories. This is important because complimentary ideas, such as virtual gerontogenes, ELS and homeodynamic space can be assimilated within classic evolutionary thinking. The inclusion of virtual gerontogenes recognises that ageing genetic entities can exist that were not originally selected as genes/alleles either for or against ageing. Moreover, a pluralistic approach which, provides scope for the inclusion of ideas around ELS and homeodynamic space acknowledges that the evolution of ageing is a dynamic, emergent and ultimately malleable process (Chmielewski 2020). At the same time a pluralistic approach provides scope for the inclusion of adaptive evolutionary arguments. However, it is necessary to acknowledge that it is unlikely ageing is genetically programmed simply because it proceeds towards a final state in a predictable fashion. Such an observation may simply indicate the biological system is built in a particular way and so always fails in more or less the same manner each time, due to thermodynamic constraints.

Figure 1 illustrates that it is important to consider the role of other disciplines such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, demography and social science can play in improving our understanding of ageing from a pluralistic perspective. Applying physical principles to biology can generate novel insights (Kinsey et al. 2023). As outlined in section "Darwinian fitness" statistical thermodynamics has been effectively applied to age structured populations in the form of EE, which offers a more concrete way of representing Darwinian fitness. Recognising that senescence and death are subject to the laws of thermodynamics, enables EE to be used within a pluralistic framework. If this is the case then the force of natural selection becomes a function of age (Demetrius and Ziehe 2007). And, including EE, helps to overcome a major limitation of the classic theories, namely that they do not include population size as a critical component of the process of selection (Dietz 2005; Brink et al. 2009). Moreover, the models MA, AP and DS all invoke the same measure of fitness. Thus, the theories based on MA, AP, and DS can be considered as limiting cases of the theory based on EE, and their relationship with EE serve to emphasize its universality (Demetrius and Legendre 2013). Consequently, a pluralistic model-based around EE as a measure of Darwinian fitness has the potential to be more expansive than the classic models of ageing on their own, which utilise the Malthusian parameter as a measure of Darwinian fitness. The importance of EE as a measure of Darwinian fitness cannot be understated as a concept, in fact it would be worthwhile to see it combined with other recent ides such as an idea proposed by Lissek and colleagues which suggested that adaptive processes e.g. transcription, epigenetic remodelling, and metabolic plasticity drive maladaptation and cause the diseases of ageing (Lissek 2024). Known as the adaptation-maladaptation theory, this idea resonates with thermodynamic thinking, as at its core is the notion that adaptive processes dysregulate biological systems.



[Discussion and conclusions]
Over the millennia considerable thought has been invested into understanding why organisms age. However, it was only when natural selection was introduced that a meaningful theoretical framework could be used to solve this problem. Natural selection forms the core of three classic evolutionary theories which have attempted to explain why this process occurs. The three classic theories are competing yet not mutually exclusive as they assume that ageing is the result of the declining efficacy of natural selection. These theories have endured for over half a century. In this time a reasonable body of experimental data has been identified which supports various aspects of the classic theories. However, emerging evidence has called into question the suitability of the classic theories. Considering this the overarching aim of this paper was to discuss the classic theories from the perspective of their limitations. A further objective was to discuss the classic theories in light of emerging theoretical alternatives. The final goal of the paper was to introduce a more pluralistic view of the evolution of ageing.

In terms of examining the limitations of the classic theories this work uncovered some noteworthy problems which present genuine theoretical and experimental challenges for the classic theories. It was outlined how using EE is potentially a more effective way of representing Darwinian fitness than using the Malthusian parameter. Circumstances were also highlighted whereby an increase in extrinsic mortality may not result in the evolution of decreased lifespan. It was also revealed that negative/neutral senescence is difficult to reconcile with the classic theories. Moreover, it was illustrated how the interplay between natural and sexual selection can impact the evolution of senescence in both males and females. However, it is crucial to stress that significant controversy remains over the role many of these issues play within classic evolutionary thinking.

Arguably a shortcoming of this review is that it did not outline every conceptual difficulty currently faced by the classic theories. Undoubtably this would have resulted in an extended manuscript, which may have failed to capture the key challenges to the classic theories. Despite this however, it is worth briefly mentioning some mechanisms which were not discussed that intersect with the challenges explored in this work. For instance, the suggested pleiotropic action of genes featured prominently in our discussion of AP. However, antagonism is merely one form of pleiotropy (Zhang 2023). Pleiotropy comes in many guises. An example is positive pleiotropy, which is considered to influence the evolution of ageing (Maklakov et al. 2015). A compelling case of positive pleiotropy can be found in Drosophila where the Indy mutation is associated with both a slower ageing and a normal fecundity rate (Marden et al. 2003). Similar examples of positive pleiotropy exist in other canonical organisms used in ageing research. Moreover, an area that requires careful consideration in future is how different forms of pleiotropy have influenced the evolution of ageing. However, this is a complex undertaking which will perhaps only be solved by using computational analysis. Computational approaches have proved effective recently at elucidating other complex problems in evolution such as primate evolution (Shao et al. 2023). Computational analysis is relevant to another point raised in this review. It was revealed that the classic models do not consider how animal–microbiome interactions may have influenced the evolution of ageing. The inherent biological complexity of microbiomes presents a significant challenge to the classic theories. It has been suggested that it is necessary to integrate the microbiome into quantitative genetics to help disentangle the complexities of host-microbiome evolution (Henry et al. 2021). This is important for any theoretical interpretation of the evolution of ageing, as it suggests that dynamic genetic multidirectional symbiotic ensembles are an important evolutionary force.

The issues raised above together with the difficulties presented in the main body of this review are challenging for the classic theories to solve. This is the reason the final section of this review was devoted to advocating for a more pluralistic interpretation of the evolution of ageing. This version of pluralism introduced here is conceptually close to the emerging field of biodemography which recognises the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the evolutionary origins of disease (Hernández-Pacheco et al. 2023). It also emphasises the importance of using EE as a measure of Darwinian fitness as opposed to relying on models which depend on the Malthusian parameter. Such an approach is needed to better understand the evolution of ageing. The rationale for introducing this pluralist approach was to infuse the evolution of ageing with a more fluid framework, given that the evolution of different rates of ageing are very much species and context dependent. However, it is worth acknowledging that pluralism may not be the best way to gain a better understanding of the evolution of ageing. It is theoretically possible the classic theories, and their alternatives can be reduced to a final unified theory. Indeed, given that nascent theories continue to emerge this could be a possibility. In the meantime, however, pluralism represents a flexible alternative which can accommodate both classic and emerging ideas.



MESH TERMS: Aging, Biological Evolution, Humans, Selection, Genetic, Animals

KEYWORDS: Ageing, Evolution, Longevity, Pluralism, Senescence

AUTHORS: Mark T. Mc Auley

YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: Biogerontology

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394625-6.00001-5
================================================================================

TITLE: The Mitochondrial Free Radical Theory of Aging

ABSTRACT: The mitochondrial free radical theory of aging is reviewed. Only two parameters currently correlate with species longevity in the right sense: the mitochondrial rate of reactive oxygen species (mitROS) production and the degree of fatty acid unsaturation of tissue membranes. Both are low in long-lived animals. In addition, the best-known manipulation that extends longevity, dietary restriction, also decreases the rate of mitROS production and oxidative damage to mtDNA. The same occurs during protein restriction as well as during methionine restriction. These two manipulations also increase maximum longevity in rodents. The decrease in mitROS generation and oxidative stress that takes place in caloric restriction seems to be due to restriction of a single dietary substance: methionine. The information available supports a mitochondrial free radical theory of aging focused on low generation of endogenous damage and low sensitivity of membranes to oxidation in long-lived animals.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Animals, Antioxidants, Caloric Restriction, Free Radicals, Humans, Mitochondria, Models, Biological

KEYWORDS: Dietary restriction, Free radicals, H(2)O(2) production, Methionine restriction, Mitochondria, ROS generation, Reactive oxygen species production

AUTHORS: Gustavo Barja

YEAR: 2014
JOURNAL: Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2021.101557
================================================================================

TITLE: The hyperfunction theory: An emerging paradigm for the biology of aging

ABSTRACT: The process of senescence (aging) is predominantly determined by the action of wild-type genes. For most organisms, this does not reflect any adaptive function that senescence serves, but rather evolutionary effects of declining selection against genes with deleterious effects later in life. To understand aging requires an account of how evolutionary mechanisms give rise to pathogenic gene action and late-life disease, that integrates evolutionary (ultimate) and mechanistic (proximate) causes into a single explanation. A well-supported evolutionary explanation by G.C. Williams argues that senescence can evolve due to pleiotropic effects of alleles with antagonistic effects on fitness and late-life health (antagonistic pleiotropy, AP). What has remained unclear is how gene action gives rise to late-life disease pathophysiology. One ultimate-proximate account is T.B.L. Kirkwood's disposable soma theory. Based on the hypothesis that stochastic molecular damage causes senescence, this reasons that aging is coupled to reproductive fitness due to preferential investment of resources into reproduction, rather than somatic maintenance. An alternative and more recent ultimate-proximate theory argues that aging is largely caused by programmatic, developmental-type mechanisms. Here ideas about AP and programmatic aging are reviewed, particularly those of M.V. Blagosklonny (the hyperfunction theory) and J.P. de Magalhães (the developmental theory), and their capacity to make sense of diverse experimental findings is assessed.

FULL TEXT:

[Introduction]
As a field, the biology of senescence (aging) is lacking in terms of a core explanatory framework or paradigm such as that possessed by chemistry or genetics (Gems and de Magalhães, 2021). This review surveys an emerging set of ideas which for convenience will be referred to here as the programmatic theory. These ideas offer a new account of the proximate mechanisms of antagonistic pleiotropy, an important evolutionary-genetic principle in the biology of aging (Williams, 1957).

Devising effective explanations of senescence as a whole is a challenge that has, unfortunately, defeated biogerontologists. Why is aging so difficult to understand? Arguably, there are two reasons in particular. First, because it is a multifactorial process, as reflected in the fact that diseases of aging are largely multifactorial in terms of their etiology. Thus, any individual theory about a given senescent etiology will be insufficient to explain the whole phenomenon. Second, because the relative contribution of the factors that together cause aging is variable and context dependent, differing according to the senescent pathology considered, to environmental conditions and type of organism (Ezcurra et al., 2018; Gems and de Magalhães, 2021).

Though this presents a difficult challenge, it does not mean that senescence is impossible to understand. Though aging is a multifactorial process, a plausible hope is that the number of individual factors involved is relatively small, particularly when viewed in terms of broad determinative principles. Moreover, given the common evolutionary origins of animal species, these principles are likely to be operative in diverse organisms. Thus, the challenge for biogerontology is to understand these individual principles, and how they combine to cause aging-related disease, and aging as a whole (Gems and de Magalhães, 2021).

While attempts to understand aging from the 1990s onwards were strongly focused on the role of accumulation of molecular damage as a cause of aging, earlier accounts tended to be more broadly multifactorial (Comfort, 1979; Cutler, 1984; Dilman, 1994; Finch, 1990; Strehler, 1977). Multifactorial models, particularly that of Vladimir Dilman, will be discussed later in this article. In the meantime, it should be emphasized that programmatic mechanisms and antagonistic pleiotropy (AP) as described here are elements of a wider, multifactorial process.

In the following discussion I will first introduce the concept of AP, as described by George Williams, and then go on to describe attempts to explain AP in terms of actual biological mechanisms (e.g. biochemical, cellular, developmental) that form a pathophysiological basis of the process of senescence. These include Tom Kirkwood’s disposable soma theory, Misha Blagosklonny’s hyperfunction theory, João Pedro de Magalhães’s developmental theory, and Vladimir Dilman’s ontogenetic theory. The latter three theories share key features, and can be referred to collectively as the programmatic theory. For definitions of key terms, see the glossary.



[The evolution of aging]
Diseases of aging are strange in that their principal etiology is not any of the usual suspects that disrupt normal function (infectious pathogens, mechanical injury, mutation, toxins etc), but rather the process of evolution. Natural selection favors individuals that leave the largest number of surviving offspring, not necessarily those that live the longest. With advancing age after the onset of reproduction, natural selection weakens with the result that new alleles that impair health in later life are more likely to escape selection and accumulate in populations, causing aging (Medawar, 1952). The causes of this selection shadow can include extrinsic factors (e.g. predation, starvation) that increase mortality disproportionately in later life (Abrams, 1993; Hamilton, 1966; Moorad et al., 2019).



[The evolution of aging - Antagonistic pleiotropy as a cause of aging]
How might gene variants with bad effects on late-life health act? Here there are two ideas. First, they could be harmful mutations with effects that do not appear until late life. A suggested example is Huntington’s disease, which does not develop until mid-life, as the selection shadow deepens. This could explain its relatively high prevalence, despite being caused by a dominant mutation (Haldane, 1941). This instantiates the mutation accumulation theory of the evolution of aging (Medawar, 1952). Here, the harmful alleles that natural selection fails to eliminate and which cause aging are very much akin to disease-causing mutations, such as those causing Marfan syndrome or hemochromatosis. According to the mutation accumulation theory aging is a form of genetic disease, arising from a multiplicity of late-acting mutations.

Second, they may be gene variants that provide a fitness benefit in early life, but also promote pathology in later life. Due to the selection shadow, fitness benefits may outweigh the later detriment, resulting in the allele spreading through the population (Williams, 1957)(Fig. 1A). Here the new allele displays pleiotropy, i.e. has several effects, that are opposite in terms of impact on fitness, i.e. antagonistic pleiotropy (AP). Given that AP genes provide fitness benefits and are present due to positive selection, they cannot be viewed as defective or mutant; rather they are, in genetic terms, wild type. Thus, insofar as they are caused by AP genes, diseases of aging are genetic diseases arising from effects of the wild-type genome. The idea that normal gene function can cause disease might, from a medical perspective, seem a contradiction in terms. But evolutionary theory, now well supported empirically (Austad and Hoffman, 2018; Byars and Voskarides, 2020; Carter and Nguyen, 2011; Zhao and Promislow, 2019), tells us that normal genes can cause late-life pathology and diseases of aging. Such genes may be referred to as gerontogenes (Johnson and Lithgow, 1992).

This is a fundamental principle of pathophysiology critical for understanding late-life disease. Yet its utility is limited by the current lack of understanding of the actual biological mechanisms (biochemical, cellular, physiological) by which AP genes exert their effects. What is needed here is an account of the determinants of aging that encompasses both ultimate, evolutionary mechanisms and proximate, biological mechanisms into a single integrated understanding. Two such ultimate-proximate accounts of the causes of aging are the disposable soma theory and the programmatic theory.



[Ultimate-proximate theory 1. Disposable soma: where damage causes aging]
For many years a popular hypothesis about aging has been that its principal cause is the accumulation of random molecular damage (Harman, 1956; Shore and Ruvkun, 2013; Zimniak, 2008). The causes of molecular damage to biomolecules are diverse, ranging from DNA replication errors to glycation of proteins (Holliday, 1997; Rattan, 2008), but particular attention was paid to damage arising from reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as the superoxide (O2
-) free radical produced as a by-product of oxidative metabolism (Beckman and Ames, 1998). If molecular damage causes aging it follows that the level of cellular maintenance that prevents damage accumulation is an important determinant of aging rate, and that the genetic determination of lifespan is likely to involve regulation of cellular maintenance mechanisms (Holliday, 1997; Partridge and Gems, 2006). In short, aging rate reflects the balance between stochastic damage accumulation and somatic maintenance levels (the damage/maintenance paradigm) (Fig. 1B).

The observation that cellular maintenance processes are costly in resource terms led to the deduction that trade-offs might exist between cellular maintenance and reproductive effort. Given limited resource availability in the wild, optimization of the trade-off would inevitably lead to levels of cellular maintenance below those necessary to entirely prevent damage accumulation. The result of this is a rapidly aging, disposable soma, in contrast to the immortal, non-aging germline (Kirkwood, 2005; Kirkwood, 1977) (Fig. 1C).

The disposable soma (DS) theory provides a clear and logical account of how trade-offs could arise between fitness traits at different points in the life history: early benefit (increased reproduction) and later cost (increased mortality due to gradual damage accumulation). Though not originally conceived as such (Armstrong, 2019) it provides a cogent explanation for the proximate mechanisms of AP gene action (Kirkwood and Rose, 1991). Yet despite its elegance, the DS theory remains unproven, and some experimental findings argue against it (Grandison et al., 2009; Piper et al., 2017; Zajitschek et al., 2019). One limitation is its dependence upon the damage/maintenance paradigm. While molecular damage, DNA damage in particular (Schumacher et al., 2021), is certainly a primary causal mechanism in some forms of senescent pathology (e.g. cancer), for many others this is far from clear (see below). While it is possible that DS effects could exacerbate pathologies where damage is a major driver, their importance as a major cause of aging currently seems unlikely (discussed further below) (Blagosklonny, 2007b; Blagosklonny, 2010e). But while its explanatory utility remains uncertain, as the first ultimate-proximate model, the DS theory was important in providing a template for the development of ultimate-proximate theories.



[Ultimate-proximate theory 2. Where aging is programmatic]
In the early 2000s it became increasingly clear that the insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS)/ mammalian (or mechanistic) target of rapamycin (mTOR) network can control aging rate across a range of organisms (Gems and Partridge, 2001; Kenyon, 2010). Discovering the IIS/mTOR-regulated, downstream mechanisms of aging itself promised to provide fundamental insights into the nature of senescence. Guided by contemporary beliefs, early attempts to understand this guessed that wild-type IIS accelerated aging by reducing somatic maintenance (e.g. antioxidant defense) thereby increasing reproductive output, consistent with the DS theory (Fontana et al., 2010; Gems and McElwee, 2005; Holzenberger et al., 2003; Honda and Honda, 1999; Kirkwood, 2005; Lithgow and Walker, 2002; Partridge and Gems, 2002b; Vanfleteren, 1993) (Fig. 1D). However, experimental findings during the same period were starting to raise doubts about the assumption that molecular damage is a primary cause of aging, particularly oxidative damage (Bjelakovic et al., 2007; Chong et al., 2007; Howes, 2006; Keaney and Gems, 2003; Keaney et al., 2004).

Against this background, two biogerontologists independently saw a way to rearrange existing concepts and findings into a new ultimate-proximate theory that is very different to DS. Although initial accounts of the theory, put forward by João Pedro de Magalhães (de Magalhães and Church, 2005) and Mikhail (Misha) Blagosklonny (Blagosklonny, 2006a), differ in emphasis and in detail, they have the same conceptual core (the programmatic theory). de Magalhães and Blagosklonny each put forward many ideas, some more persuasive than others; the following account of the framework of ideas centered on the programmatic theory is to a certain extent my own synthesis of their ideas.



[Ultimate-proximate theory 2. Where aging is programmatic - The core programmatic theory]
Growth hormone (GH), IIS and mTOR are part of a nutrient-sensitive signaling network that promotes growth, development and aging. This suggests that growth and development somehow cause aging. But three lines of reasoning initially seemed to argue against this deduction. First, it suggests that there is a program for aging, implying that aging is a purposeful adaptation; but according to evolutionary theory aging is non-adaptive, and therefore not programmed (Austad, 2004; Kirkwood, 2005; Partridge and Gems, 2002b). Second, growth and development are not obviously linked to somatic maintenance and molecular damage accumulation, which was assumed to be the main cause of senescence. Third, it is difficult to see how growth processes can limit lifespan. The programmatic theory provides answers to each of these three objections.

First, the program problem. Here it is helpful to consider Williams’ own initial thoughts about how AP might work at the level of gene function, which involve a hypothetical gene for calcium deposition. A new allele appears that increases Ca2+ deposition during bone development, and thereby promotes fitness (e.g. by aiding escape from predators); in later life, its continued action promotes Ca2+ deposition into blood vessel walls, contributing to arteriosclerosis (Fig. 2A) (Williams, 1957). In principle, a mechanism could evolve to switch off calcium deposition, but due to the selection shadow it does not. Here, an evolved function of a gene continues or runs on in a futile fashion in later life causing pathology. The principle involved here is notably different to the DS theory. If this can occur for the function of structural genes of this sort, why not for regulatory genes controlling entire developmental programs and involving action of large numbers of regulated genes (Fig. 2B)?

Evolutionary theory rules out biological programs for aging (i.e. aging as an adaptation) for most species, but not programmatic or program-like mechanisms that promote senescence (Blagosklonny, 2007c; de Magalhães and Church, 2005). Part of the confusion arises because the word program here has two meanings. On the one hand it can mean a genetically-determined and complex process involving changes in gene expression, cellular function, tissue composition etc (programmed in the mechanistic sense); on the other hand it can mean a program for something that promotes fitness (programmed in the adaptive sense) (Galimov et al., 2019). Aided by this disambiguation, the new theory is able to argue that in later life programmatic changes occur that are programmed in the mechanistic but not the adaptive sense, or as Blagosklonny describes them, quasi-programmed (Blagosklonny, 2006a). The derived noun quasi-program, describing a programmatic, pathogenic entity, is particularly helpful for discussion of programmatic pathophysiology.

To explain the quasi-program concept, Blagosklonny employs various homely analogies. For example, one wants hot water for tea and so boils some in a saucepan. If, having taken the water, one leaves the saucepan on the hot stove, the pan will become damaged. Here a purposeful program for preparing hot water becomes a futile quasi-program for damaging the saucepan (Blagosklonny, 2006a). In living organisms later-life off switches for developmental programs are often absent because of declining selection in later life (Blagosklonny, 2006a; Williams, 1957). Similarly, de Magalhães uses the analogy of a program to build a house, and imagines a carpet layer working on pointlessly after completion of the program: “ever-increasing layers of carpets will eventually prevent doors from opening, and ultimately, nobody will be able to get in or out of the house” (de Magalhães, 2012). This starts to explain how growth promotion by IIS/mTOR can promote aging: they promote both developmental programs and senescence-promoting quasi-programs (Blagosklonny, 2006a; de Magalhães and Church, 2005).

But what about molecular damage? de Magalhães and Blagosklonny both suggest that the assumption that aging is largely and primarily caused by accumulation of molecular damage is incorrect (Blagosklonny, 2006a; de Magalhães and Church, 2005). As Blagosklonny articulates it, the primary mechanisms of aging do not involve loss of function, but rather the opposite: too much function or, as he puts it, hyperfunction, driven by wild-type gene action. This claim challenges the entrenched assumption that aging is fundamentally a passive process of system failure and breakdown. Thinking of mTOR effects in particular, Blagosklonny argues that it is the opposite: an active, self-destructive process.

Finally, how can processes of growth and development lead to disease? Broadly speaking, the programmatic theory argues that developmental changes in adulthood, including late-life continuation of developmental programs, is pathogenic, causing disruption of tissue and organ function. Several examples of simple forms of developmental run-on follow. Presbyopia is a type of long-sightedness that increases with age. Its cause is continued, futile growth of the lens during adulthood, leading to a gradual increase in lens thickness (Strenk et al., 2005). In men, the prostate gland typically exhibits a gradual increase in size as a response to long term exposure to dihydrotestosterone. This leads eventually to benign prostatic hyperplasia (Nacusi and Tindall, 2011; Waters et al., 2000) and increased risk of prostate cancer, a major cause of age-related death in men (Untergasser et al., 2005). In a third example, this time hypothetical, the process of synaptic pruning in the brain that promotes cognitive development runs on in later life, leading to age-related cognitive decline (De Magalhaes and Sandberg, 2005). A final example affects babirusas, a type of wild pig found in Indonesia. Adult males have curved, tusk-like maxillary canine teeth that point backwards up over the snout. These continue to grow until in some cases the backward curve of their growth trajectory drives them into the cranium, sometimes piercing it through (Macdonald, 2018). Here, in each case, continuation of normal, wild-type growth leads to pathology. However, most aging-related diseases are etiologically multi-factorial, and contributions of programmatic etiologies more complex (described below).

A simplified scheme of the programmatic theory is shown in Fig. 2C. Beyond these core tenets, Blagosklonny and de Magalhães have each contributed additional ideas, which extend and strengthen the theorem. For example, Blagosklonny elaborates upon how quasi-programs affect lifespan and disease, and makes pointed critiques of various concepts arising from the damage/maintenance paradigm, while de Magalhães integrates the programmatic theory conceptually with earlier developmental theories of aging, and explores evolutionary mechanisms beyond AP and IIS/mTOR that contribute to programmatic aging. Ideas from these two commentators will be discussed in turn.



[Mikhail Blagosklonny - Blagosklonny’s research approach]
To understand Blagosklonny’s thinking it is helpful to know something about his background and approach. Unlike most biogerontologists, he has a clinical background (M.D. in internal medicine, Ph.D. in experimental medicine and cardiology). He is a proponent and practitioner of conceptual research, which uses explorations of the scientific literature to develop new hypotheses and to test them, sometimes repurposing existing data to draw new conclusions in ways unintended by the original researchers (Blagosklonny, 2007d; Blagosklonny and Pardee, 2002). He initially applied this approach for research in experimental oncology, including a focus on anti-cancer drug action (Blagosklonny, 2005a; Blagosklonny, 2005b; Blagosklonny, 2005c). An interest in the potential of the drug rapamycin as an anti-cancer agent (Blagosklonny and Darzynkiewicz, 2002) led him to the idea that this drug might act by inhibiting aging. This led in turn to the question of the causes of aging itself, and a re-examination of central ideas in biogerontology, both ultimate (e.g. antagonistic pleiotropy, disposable soma) and proximate (e.g. molecular damage accumulation, telomere shortening).

A strength of conceptual research is the relative ease of combining findings and concepts from different scientific disciplines, for example between basic and clinical research fields (Blagosklonny, 2003b), enabling broader insights. Blagosklonny’s conclusions draw extensively from both biogerontological sources and, importantly, clinical literature on age-related disease; thus, his ideas are more strongly grounded in contemporary research findings (including clinical findings) than in traditional theories about aging. They are also influenced by earlier ideas developed in Russia in the 1970-80s (Dilman, 1994) (discussed further below).

Given that the starting point of the work was to understand the action of rapamycin, his perspective is highly focused on this drug and the protein that it inhibits, mTOR (Blagosklonny, 2007a; Blagosklonny, 2010b; Blagosklonny, 2012c; Blagosklonny, 2014b; Blagosklonny, 2019a), which restricts its scope somewhat. However, his arguments are often applicable (and applied) to the broader endocrine and signalling network that regulates development and growth, including GH and IIS. In many of his discussions, the aging process that he describes is the set of processes controlled by GH/IIS/mTOR which, as he sometimes emphasises, is not the entire aging process.

Key to the initial development of Blagosklonny’s theorem was his realization that growth stimulation leads rapidly to cellular senescence when the cell cycle is arrested, with no involvement of molecular damage (Blagosklonny, 2003a). (Note here that cellular senescence, as defined by Hayflick, should not be confused with the broader phenomenon of senescence). His main ideas are set out in three early essays (Blagosklonny, 2006a; Blagosklonny, 2007b; Blagosklonny, 2008b), particularly the first of these. He then produced a very long series of follow-up essays (over 60), some derived from additional conceptual research with newer findings, and some responding to individual new papers. Many of these essays argue that an mTOR hyperfunction model better explains published findings than the conventional damage-based view, and often include explanatory reiterations of his version of the programmatic theory. The repetition to an extent reflects the lack of response to his work from other biogerontologists; “Repetitio est mater studiorum” as he notes at one point (Blagosklonny, 2018b). Some present new elaborations and additions to the theory, e.g. (Blagosklonny, 2007c; Blagosklonny, 2009b; Blagosklonny, 2010c; Blagosklonny, 2010d; Blagosklonny, 2018a; Blagosklonny, 2019b). For brief summaries of the content of 68 of his essays, see Table 1. The essays draw to some extent on his own laboratory work, mostly on the regulation of cellular senescence, see e.g. (Demidenko et al., 2009a; Demidenko and Blagosklonny, 2008; Demidenko and Blagosklonny, 2009; Demidenko et al., 2010; Demidenko et al., 2009b; Leontieva and Blagosklonny, 2016; Leontieva et al., 2015; Leontieva et al., 2012a; Leontieva et al., 2012b). At times they seem written in haste, as if painted with rough brushstrokes, but what they sometimes lack in polish they often make up for in originality and creative insight. Key elements of Blagosklonny’s framework of ideas, beyond the core programmatic theory include the following.



[Mikhail Blagosklonny - How do quasi-programs promoted by IIS/mTOR limit lifespan?]
Aging is a deteriorative process that causes decline and death, but how? The core programmatic AP account provides a cause, but does not explain how it leads to life-limiting harm. It is here that Blagosklonny in particular sheds light, helped by three basic ideas that combine to give a very different view of aging to that which is traditional in biogerontology. First, that death due to aging is caused by disease. Second, that aging results from a nested series of life-limiting etiologies. Third, that programmatic AP promoted by IIS/mTOR causes life-limiting disease in a largely non-cell autonomous manner.



[Mikhail Blagosklonny - Blagosklonny on the attack]
In many of his essays, Blagosklonny uses conceptual research to compare how well damage-based and programmatic theories do at explaining findings past and present. Overall, these find in favor of the latter, and support critiques of several traditional biogerontological claims and concepts, which he sometimes pokes fun at for their perceived inadequacies.



[João Pedro de Magalhães]
The programmatic theory reconciles a mechanistic theory based on developmental change with the AP theory, and provides an account of IIS/mTOR action on aging. But both developmental changes during aging, and AP are wider phenomena, as has been emphasized (Maklakov and Chapman, 2019), and all causes of aging is a wider category still. de Magalhães, originally from Portugal and now at the University of Liverpool, gives some consideration to programmatic etiologies in the broader sense (de Magalhães and Church, 2005), and explores issues relating to the programmatic theory that Blagosklonny touches on more briefly or not at all, including the following. How does the programmatic theory relate to earlier developmental theories of aging? And: how does it relate to epigenetic changes during adulthood?



[João Pedro de Magalhães - From developmental theories to the programmatic theory]
Over the years it has often been suggested that aging is a form of developmental abnormality, resulting e.g. from increased or decreased gene silencing, transcriptional deregulation, dysdifferentiation or overdifferentiation (de Magalhães and Church, 2005). Certain broad characteristics of aging are suggestive of its developmental nature. For example, different mammals (e.g. mice vs humans) differ greatly in terms of rate of development, timing of maturity, and of appearance of many of the same diseases of aging (e.g. cancer, osteoporosis, cataracts) (de Magalhães and Church, 2005). This is also true of the gradual age-dependent decline in cognitive function (De Magalhaes and Sandberg, 2005). Moreover, across mammalian species the ratio between time from conception to sexual maturity and adult lifespan is approximately constant, at about 1:4 (Charnov, 1993), suggesting a possible mechanistic relationship between development rate and adult lifespan (de Magalhães and Church, 2005). Similarly, the complex and stereotyped nature of many manifestations of senescence (e.g. atherosclerosis, osteoporosis, male pattern baldness) seem more consistent with programmatic pathophysiology than random molecular damage (Blagosklonny, 2006a).

While it is clear that both stochastic damage and programmatic changes contribute to senescence, in terms of their relative importance these are competing theories. The former predominated during recent decades, but less so prior to that. For example, as de Magalhães points out (de Magalhães, 2012), the discovery of effects of DR on aging, initially in fruit flies and rats, arose from the idea that slow growth rate results in slower aging (McCay and Crowell, 1934; Northrop, 1917; Osborne et al., 1917; Park, 2010), including Bidder’s hypothesis (Bidder, 1932). Later work showing that although life-long DR limits growth, adult-limited DR was sufficient to extend lifespan in fully grown mice (Weindruch and Walford, 1982) appeared to argue against the developmental theory; however, it is consistent with stunting of quasi-programs during adulthood.

Similarly, in chico (insulin receptor substrate) mutant fruit flies with reduced IIS, increased lifespan is seen in both chico homozygotes and heterozygotes, but only the homozygotes exhibit reduced body size (Clancy et al., 2001; Tu et al., 2002). Thus, chico mutant longevity is not caused by their reduced body size (Gems and Partridge, 2001), suggesting that reduced growth does not slow aging; however, these results, again, do not rule out suppression of quasi-programs during adulthood. In fact, chico-/+
 heterozygote females show reduced egg production (Clancy et al., 2001), consistent with biosynthetic (and programmatic) insufficiency.

Arguably, the confusion here stems partly from ambiguities arising from the words growth and development. Simply understood these refer to changes occurring during ontogenesis that largely cease at sexual maturity. A metric of growth is adult body size, and to speak of growth after maturation in organisms with determinate growth, after they have stopped growing, makes little sense. But in the programmatic model, growth pathways promote quasi-program progression, or “twisted growth” as it has been described (Blagosklonny, 2008b) during adulthood. Similarly, development. A quasi-program is defined as “a program for development that has not been turned off” (Blagosklonny, 2006a). Yet it is clear that what is meant here is development in the sense of all complex programs involving growth and differentiative change: not only those of ontogenesis, but also for example those involved in reproduction and tissue repair and remodelling during adulthood (c.f. the role of “senescent” fibroblasts in wound healing) (Demaria et al., 2014). To avoid this confusion the term programmatic theory is used here, rather than developmental theory as previously (Maklakov and Chapman, 2019). This avoids confusion with earlier developmental theories of aging, and over the meaning of development, and also alludes to the reconciliation of ultimate and proximate perspectives in the theory.



[João Pedro de Magalhães - From the programmatic theory to epigenetic aging and biological clocks]
A recent topic of interest among biogerontologists has been epigenetic changes during adulthood (Benayoun et al., 2015; Horvath and Raj, 2018). de Magalhães notes studies showing similarities between changes in gene expression occurring during development and aging (Lui et al., 2010; Somel et al., 2010; Takasugi, 2011) as evidence that drivers of epigenetic change are programmatic rather than stochastic (de Magalhães, 2012). As a developmental process, quasi-program execution is expected to involve epigenetic change. Thus, the programmatic theory provides an explanation in terms of ultimate and proximate causes for epigenetic changes in aging (though this does not rule out the action of other contributory mechanisms).

The question of how biological time is marked during aging is central to biogerontology, and many forms of clock have been proposed. These include a metabolic clock in the rate-of-living theory (Pearl, 1928), a telomere shortening replicometer in replicative senescence (Olovnikov, 1996), and epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation (Horvath, 2013; Horvath and Raj, 2018). According to the programmatic theory, the major aging clock is a developmental one. de Magalhães sees epigenetic changes as likely to arise from the ticking of a developmental clock (de Magalhães, 2012), whose speed is increased by IIS/mTOR (de Magalhães and Church, 2005). Consistent with this, the methylation clock is slowed by conditions in which mTOR is inhibited (Blagosklonny, 2018a), for example in mice treated with rapamycin, in long-lived Ames (Prop1), Snell (Pit1), and Laron (Ghr) dwarf mutant mice with defective GH signaling (Cole et al., 2017; Consortium, 2021; Petkovich et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017), and in rapamycin-treated cultured human fibroblasts and keratinocytes (Horvath et al., 2019; Matsuyama et al., 2019). Moreover, mTOR functions in circadian clocks, underscoring the role of mTOR in setting the pace of biological time (Blagosklonny, 2018a).

The developmental basis of epigenetic changes during adulthood in mammals has received further support from recent work by Steve Horvath and colleagues. Of particular note, methylation clocks mark time during embryogenesis and postnatal development as well as (running much more slowly) during adulthood, and clock methylation sites are strongly associated with genes specifying developmental processes. The latter include those under regulation of the polycomb repressor complex (PRC), including multiple Hox genes, leading to the conclusion that “the essence of the aging process itself is an integral part of, and the consequence of the development of life” (Raj and Horvath, 2020). The link between clock methylation sites and PRC-regulated genes was also recently seen in a universal mammalian methylation clock, implying evolutionary conservation of developmental clock mechanisms (Consortium, 2021).

Almost a century ago, Raymond Pearl attributed rate-of-living effects, as seen in effects of ambient temperature on lifespan in poikilotherms (e.g. Drosophila, C. elegans)(Klass, 1977; Loeb and Northrop, 1917) to metabolic rate (Pearl, 1928), an idea that was subsequently linked to the ROS theory (Sohal and Weindruch, 1996). The programmatic theory suggests instead that effects of temperature on both development and aging reflects a change in the rate of developmental processes.



[Vladimir Dilman: programmatic aging within a multifactorial model]
As emphasized in the opening of this essay, antagonistic pleiotropy and programmatic mechanisms are clearly not the sole cause of aging. To close, I will present a sketch of a model of the whole aging process, derived from a scheme originally developed in the 1980s by Vladimir Dilman, but modified here in the light of recent advances. Dilman, who died in 1994, was a preeminent gerontologist and clinician in the U.S.S.R., in many ways the Soviet Union’s equivalent to thoughtful biogerontologists in the West such as Alex Comfort, Bernard Strehler, Richard Cutler and Caleb Finch, but his theories are little known outside Russia. He was also the father of Misha Blagosklonny.



[Vladimir Dilman: programmatic aging within a multifactorial model - Dilman’s ontogenetic and four models theories]
Dilman argues that, overall, aging and age-related disease are etiologically multifactorial, and attributable to four distinct disease models: ecological, genetic, accumulational and ontogenetic (Dilman, 1994) (Chapter 11) (Fig. 6A). Ecological here is in the sense used by Frederic Ludwig to describe the main disease model in medicine, where diseases result from harmful extrinsic factors ranging from infectious pathogens to dietary toxins (Ludwig, 1980). Genetic here refers to inherited genetic diseases, rather than somatic mutations or pathogenic action of wild-type genes. The accumulational model includes molecular damage accumulation, but also other types of pathogenic accumulative processes. The ontogenetic model involves the continued action of developmental processes in later life promoting senescence.

According to this four models scheme, mean lifespan and inter-individual variation in lifespan is largely attributable to ecological and genetic determinants, and maximum lifespan to accumulational and, particularly, ontogenetic determinants. While Dilman’s ontogenetic model clearly prefigures the programmatic theory, it was derived as a generalization from a now partially outdated theory about the control of aging by the hypothalamus. Briefly, this argued that aging is largely caused by programmed loss of hypothalamic sensitivity to feedback inhibition, leading to compensatory endocrine changes with pathogenic consequences, what he called hyperadaptosis (Dilman, 1984). The ontogenetic processes that he particularly refers to are those controlling systemic homeostasis in adulthood, namely energy metabolism (insulin), reproduction (estrogen) and adaptive systems (glucocorticoids).

Yet in amongst Dilman’s many ideas and reflections are key elements of the new programmatic theory, including the following. The ontogenetic model itself is prescient; as Dilman describes it: “the genetic program of an organism is not constructed according to the rule ‘from beginning to end,’ but proceeds ‘from a beginning, with the end unspecified’” (Dilman, 1994) (Chapter 6). He notes in passing the congruence between the ontogenetic model and antagonistic pleiotropy (Dilman, 1986). Like Blagosklonny, he emphatically rejects the distinction drawn between normal aging and age-related disease: “normal aging is a disease, or more precisely, a sum of diseases” (Dilman, 1994) (Chapter 6). Like de Magalhães, he emphasizes that ontogenetic etiologies are operative at a level above that of the cellular; however, he views the key level as systemic, while in the modern programmatic theory it is at all supra-cellular levels (from tissue microenvironment to systemic). By contrast, at the subcellular level, accumulative mechanisms are more important (e.g. DNA damage accumulation).

Again like de Magalhães, he views the fixity among mammals of the length of the developmental period as a proportion of total lifespan as support for the role of ontogenetic mechanisms in aging. Here he makes an interesting observation. The standard explanation for this constancy is that an increased selection shadow (e.g. due to increased extrinsic mortality) leads to the evolution of earlier sexual maturity and shorter lifespan, via independent mechanisms (earlier reproduction increases fitness, earlier selection shadow allows earlier senescence to evolve) (Charnov, 1993; Harvey and Purvis, 1999; Promislow, 1993). But Dilman wonders about the obverse situation, where longevity evolves to increase fitness via a longer reproductive span. He asks: given the independent mechanisms model, why should a delay in sexual maturity occur? More plausibly, longevity evolves through deceleration of the entire ontogenetic program, which slows both development and aging (Dilman, 1994) (Chapter 11); Blagosklonny later made a similar point (Blagosklonny, 2013a). According to this interpretation, the longer development time in humans relative to other higher primates evolved not due to any fitness benefit, but as a side-effect of selection for increased longevity, i.e. it is an unselected outcome of antagonistic pleiotropy, an evolutionary spandrel (Gould, 1997; Gould and Lewontin, 1979). Consistent with the ontogenetic model is the earlier puberty, accelerated cognitive decline and shorter lifespan in mice over-expressing growth hormone, and the converse effects in dwarf and DR mice (Chandrashekar et al., 2004).

A major question raised by multifactorial models of aging is how the component factors interact with one another and here Dilman is, again, insightful. He argues that both ecological and accumulative factors can modulate ontogenetic aging, and that accumulational and ontogenetic mechanisms, though fundamentally independent are yet interwoven. He also suggests that stochastic damage may occur either in a wholly probabilistic fashion (as in somatic DNA damage accumulation), or as the result of genetically-determined programmatic mechanisms, what he refers to as “regular stochastic processes”. Here he has in mind ROS generated by mitochondrial metabolism. A recent case fitting this description is protein aggregation in C. elegans, resulting from a programmatic down-regulation of proteostatic mechanisms from around the time of sexual maturation (Labbadia and Morimoto, 2014).



[Vladimir Dilman: programmatic aging within a multifactorial model - A new multifactorial model based on Dilman’s four models]
While Dilman’s ontogenetic theory is a predecessor of the programmatic theory, one can, in a rather recursive fashion, modify and update his four models theory in the light of its newer descendent (Fig. 6B). First, by acknowledging the predominance of the wild-type genotype as the determinant and driver of programmatic mechanisms. This incorporates AP as a major determinative mechanism. Second, to unify ecological and genetic determinants into a single, broad category of causes apart from wild-type function. These represent the major causes of diseases in earlier life, where normal, wild-type function is disrupted. The rearranged scheme emphasizes the centrality of wild-type function, which can be illustrated by a thought experiment. If ecological and genetic factors were, by magic, eliminated, aging would still occur, and there would be little change in either the rate of acceleration of mortality with age (Gompertzian aging) or maximum lifespan. By contrast, if mechanisms of aging from wild-type function were removed, Gompertzian aging would be greatly reduced, though not, one assumes, entirely, due to accumulative mechanisms independent of wild-type function.

The role of inherited mutations in aging in this model requires further explanation. One proposed cause of aging, and mechanism of its evolution, is inherited mutations whose deleterious effects are expressed only later in life, as exemplified by Huntington’s disease (Haldane, 1941; Medawar, 1952). An unexplained feature of this mutation accumulation theory is the mechanism that causes a mutation to remain harmless throughout development and early adulthood, and then become harmful in later life. One possibility is that it is wild-type gene action and programmatic changes that cause the deleterious effects of such mutations to become expressed, or unmasked. Returning to the thought experiment again: according to the unmasking hypothesis, if one eliminated the wild-type gene action component from the revised Dilman model (Fig. 6B), a carrier of the Huntington mutation would not develop the disease.

An important feature of multifactorial models of aging, noted previously (Ezcurra et al., 2018; Gems and de Magalhães, 2021), is their highly context-dependent nature. For a given animal species, the relative contribution of different etiological factors will vary not only between different elements of senescence (e.g. different diseases of aging), but also between individuals. Moreover, the relative contribution of different factors may vary more broadly between species. For example, in humans, environmental, genetic, ontogenetic and accumulative factors all contribute to the development of atherosclerosis, a major determinant of age-related death in humans. The relative importance of these factors will vary between individuals. In one, a major cause may be obesity, and increased cholesterol accumulation; in another, genetic predisposition (e.g. the APOE4 mutation), in a third, wild-type gene action may act alone. By contrast, the large uterine tumors that are invariably present in senescent C. elegans develop due to wholly programmatic mechanisms (Wang et al., 2018a; Wang et al., 2018b), consistent with the view that plastic, programmatic mechanisms play an exceptionally large role in aging in C. elegans (Gems et al., 2021; Lohr et al., 2019).



[Vladimir Dilman: programmatic aging within a multifactorial model - The ontogenesis of the programmatic theory]
Scientific discovery is rightly the object of wonder, something to marvel at. In my view, this applies to the programmatic theory. In the early 18th century a fierce priority dispute broke out between Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz arguing over who invented calculus. The modern view is that this was silly, and that both men developed it independently. Such independent, simultaneous discoveries are quite common, and illustrate how scientific innovation is not so much a reflection of individual genius, as interactions of imaginative individuals with a collective and evolving fabric of knowledge. Once the fashion among scientists, these days I-said-it-first-ism risks being interpreted as a character weakness (principally, egotism).

The transpersonal nature of scientific thinking applies well to the programmatic theory, which has evolved over a long period, with certain key contributors. Dilman’s overall scheme, based around his hypothalamic model, was flawed and did not cohere well, yet included a number of prescient elements which contributed to Blagosklonny’s more compelling and better-supported theorem. Dilman himself noted similarities between his ontogenetic theory and Bidder’s hypothesis, formulated in the 1930s (Dilman, 1986). By contrast, de Magalhães’ version of the programmatic theory was developed without knowledge of either Dilman or Blagosklonny’s work. The possibility of the programmatic theory was, as it were, hanging in the air from the early 2000s, and both de Magalhães and Blagosklonny spotted it, with Blagosklonny developing it in more detail with respect to its capacity to explain the origins of disease. Yet the programmatic theory of the mid-2000s forms only part of a wider biology of aging, as discussed here and elsewhere (Gems et al., 2021; Lohr et al., 2019; Maklakov and Chapman, 2019). Of Dilman: he was in many ways ahead of his time and his work deserves greater recognition than it received during his lifetime (at least, outside Russia). He was noted for his creative and integrative thinking style (Napalkov, 2001), characteristics shared by Blagosklonny, and de Magalhães too.



[Concluding remarks]
The programmatic theory of aging as developed by Blagosklonny and de Magalhães promises to eventually serve as part of a general framework of understanding aging and the pathophysiology of late-life disease. This could at long last provide the field of biogerontology with an effective explanatory paradigm similar to that provided by the germ theory for the study of infectious disease, and the periodic table for chemistry. More work is needed to explore, test and expand this framework of ideas. This includes elements not discussed here, which will be the subjects of future essays, such as the concept of hypofunction (Maklakov and Chapman, 2019), biological constraint, how quasi-programs are initiated, and how quasi-programs interact in disease pathophysiology.



MESH TERMS: Aging, Biological Evolution, Biology, Humans, Longevity, Reproduction

KEYWORDS: Antagonistic pleiotropy, Hyperfunction, Insulin/IGF-1 signalling, Programmatic aging, Quasi-programs, Theories of aging, mTOR

AUTHORS: David Gems

YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: Ageing Research Reviews

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2010.09.007
================================================================================

TITLE: The reproductive-cell cycle theory of aging: An update

ABSTRACT: The Reproductive-Cell Cycle Theory posits that the hormones that regulate reproduction act in an antagonistic pleiotrophic manner to control aging via cell cycle signaling; promoting growth and development early in life in order to achieve reproduction, but later in life, in a futile attempt to maintain reproduction, become dysregulated and drive senescence. Since reproduction is the most important function of an organism from the perspective of the survival of the species, if reproductive-cell cycle signaling factors determine the rate of growth, determine the rate of development, determine the rate of reproduction, and determine the rate of senescence, then by definition they determine the rate of aging and thus lifespan. The theory is able to explain: 1) the simultaneous regulation of the rate of aging and reproduction as evidenced by the fact that environmental conditions and experimental interventions known to extend longevity are associated with decreased reproductive-cell cycle signaling factors, thereby slowing aging and preserving fertility in a hostile reproductive environment; 2) two phenomena that are closely related to species lifespan-the rate of growth and development and the ultimate size of the animal; 3). the apparent paradox that size is directly proportional to lifespan and inversely proportional to fertility between species but vice versa within a species; 4). how differing rates of reproduction between species is associated with differences in their lifespan; 5). why we develop aging-related diseases; and 6). an evolutionarily credible reason for why and how aging occurs-these hormones act in an antagonistic pleiotrophic manner via cell cycle signaling; promoting growth and development early in life in order to achieve reproduction, but later in life, in a futile attempt to maintain reproduction, become dysregulated and drive senescence (dyosis). In essence, the Reproductive-Cell Cycle Theory can explain aging in all sexually reproductive life forms.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Animals, Cell Cycle, Cell Death, Cell Differentiation, Gonadal Hormones, Humans, Hypothalamic Hormones, Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System, Pituitary Hormones, Reproduction

AUTHORS: Craig S. Atwood, Richard L. Bowen

YEAR: 2011
JOURNAL: Experimental Gerontology

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2021.111583
================================================================================

TITLE: The tumor suppression theory of aging

ABSTRACT: Despite continued increases in human life expectancy, the factors determining the rate of human biological aging remain unknown. Without understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying aging, efforts to prevent aging are unlikely to succeed. The tumor suppression theory of aging introduced here proposes somatic mutation as the proximal cause of aging, but postulates that oncogenic transformation and clonal expansion, not functional impairment, are the relevant consequences of somatic mutation. Obesity and caloric restriction accelerate and decelerate aging due to their effect on cell proliferation, during which most mutations arise. Most phenotypes of aging are merely tumor-suppressive mechanisms that evolved to limit malignant growth, the dominant age-related cause of death in early and middle life. Cancer limits life span for most long-lived mammals, a phenomenon known as Peto's paradox. Its conservation across species demonstrates that mutation is a fundamental but hard limit on mammalian longevity. Cell senescence and apoptosis and differentiation induced by oncogenes, telomere shortening or DNA damage evolved as a second line of defense to limit the tumorigenic potential of clonally expanding cells, but accumulating senescent cells, senescence-associated secretory phenotypes and stem cell exhaustion eventually cause tissue dysfunction and the majority, if not most, phenotypes of aging.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Caloric Restriction, Carcinogenesis, Cell Self Renewal, Cell Transformation, Neoplastic, Clonal Evolution, Humans, Longevity, Mutation Accumulation

KEYWORDS: Aging, Cancer, Cell senescence, Somatic mutation, Tumor suppression

AUTHORS: Alexander M. Wolf

YEAR: 2021
JOURNAL: Mechanisms of Ageing and Development

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2025.156158
================================================================================

TITLE: Metabolaging: a new geroscience perspective linking aging pathologies and metabolic dysfunction

ABSTRACT: With age, our metabolic systems undergo significant alterations, which can lead to a cascade of adverse effects that are implicated in both metabolic disorders, such as diabetes, and in the body's ability to respond to acute stress and trauma. To elucidate the metabolic imbalances arising from aging, we introduce the concept of "metabolaging." This framework encompasses the broad spectrum of metabolic disruptions associated with the hallmarks of aging, including the functional decline of key metabolically active organs, like the adipose tissue. By examining how these organs interact with essential nutrient-sensing pathways, "metabolaging" provides a more comprehensive view of the systemic metabolic imbalances that occur with age. This concept extends to understanding how age-related metabolic disturbances can influence the response to acute stressors, like burn injuries, highlighting the interplay between metabolic dysfunction and the ability to handle severe physiological challenges. Finally, we propose potential interventions that hold promise in mitigating the effects of metabolaging and its downstream consequences.

MESH TERMS: Humans, Aging, Metabolic Diseases, Geroscience, Animals

KEYWORDS: Adipose tissue, Aging, Burn injury, Hypermetabolism, Inflammaging, Metabolaging, Metabolism

AUTHORS: Fadi Khalaf, Dalia Barayan, Sean Saldanha, Marc G. Jeschke

YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: Metabolism

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1016/s0891-5849(00)00317-8
================================================================================

TITLE: Mitochondrial free radical generation, oxidative stress, and aging11This article is dedicated to the memory of our dear friend, colleague, and mentor Lars Ernster (1920–1998), in gratitude for all he gave to us.

ABSTRACT: Mitochondria have been described as "the powerhouses of the cell" because they link the energy-releasing activities of electron transport and proton pumping with the energy conserving process of oxidative phosphorylation, to harness the value of foods in the form of ATP. Such energetic processes are not without dangers, however, and the electron transport chain has proved to be somewhat "leaky." Such side reactions of the mitochondrial electron transport chain with molecular oxygen directly generate the superoxide anion radical (O2*-), which dismutates to form hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which can further react to form the hydroxyl radical (HO*). In addition to these toxic electron transport chain reactions of the inner mitochondrial membrane, the mitochondrial outer membrane enzyme monoamine oxidase catalyzes the oxidative deamination of biogenic amines and is a quantitatively large source of H2O2 that contributes to an increase in the steady state concentrations of reactive species within both the mitochondrial matrix and cytosol. In this article we review the mitochondrial rates of production and steady state levels of these reactive oxygen species. Reactive oxygen species generated by mitochondria, or from other sites within or outside the cell, cause damage to mitochondrial components and initiate degradative processes. Such toxic reactions contribute significantly to the aging process and form the central dogma of "The Free Radical Theory of Aging." In this article we review current understandings of mitochondrial DNA, RNA, and protein modifications by oxidative stress and the enzymatic removal of oxidatively damaged products by nucleases and proteases. The possible contributions of mitochondrial oxidative polynucleotide and protein turnover to apoptosis and aging are explored.

MESH TERMS: Animals, Apoptosis, Cellular Senescence, DNA Damage, Electron Transport, Free Radicals, Glutathione, Hydrogen Peroxide, Mitochondria, Oxidants, Oxidative Stress, Reactive Oxygen Species

AUTHORS: Enrique Cadenas, Kelvin J.A. Davies

YEAR: 2000
JOURNAL: Free Radical Biology and Medicine

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1038/s41556-025-01698-7
================================================================================

TITLE: An overview of contemporary theories of ageing

ABSTRACT: Ageing is a complex biological process whose underlying mechanisms remain contentious. Nonetheless, due to an ageing global population and the rising incidence of age-related diseases, understanding why we age is one of the most important scientific questions of our time, with profound medical implications. Here, I explore the fundamental nature of the ageing process and provide an overview of modern mechanistic theories. I critically examine two main groups of ageing theories: error-based and program-based theories. I discuss the relevance of these theories in the context of ageing patterns, genetic manipulations and longevity drugs, highlighting how experimental challenges and technological limitations have hindered progress. Overall, there is a pressing and unmet need for a robust theoretical framework in ageing research. Elucidating the cellular and molecular mechanisms of ageing would be crucial for developing effective interventions that slow the ageing process and prevent its associated diseases.

MESH TERMS: Humans, Aging, Animals, Longevity, Models, Biological

AUTHORS: João Pedro de Magalhães

YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: Nature Cell Biology

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1038/s41576-018-0004-3
================================================================================

TITLE: DNA methylation-based biomarkers and the epigenetic clock theory of ageing

ABSTRACT: Identifying and validating molecular targets of interventions that extend the human health span and lifespan has been difficult, as most clinical biomarkers are not sufficiently representative of the fundamental mechanisms of ageing to serve as their indicators. In a recent breakthrough, biomarkers of ageing based on DNA methylation data have enabled accurate age estimates for any tissue across the entire life course. These 'epigenetic clocks' link developmental and maintenance processes to biological ageing, giving rise to a unified theory of life course. Epigenetic biomarkers may help to address long-standing questions in many fields, including the central question: why do we age?

MESH TERMS: Aging, Animals, DNA Methylation, Epigenesis, Genetic, Humans

AUTHORS: Steve Horvath, Kenneth Raj

YEAR: 2018
JOURNAL: Nature Reviews Genetics

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1038/s43587-022-00252-6
================================================================================

TITLE: A complex systems approach to aging biology

ABSTRACT: Having made substantial progress understanding molecules, cells, genes and pathways, aging biology research is now moving toward integration of these parts, attempting to understand how their joint dynamics may contribute to aging. Such a shift of perspective requires the adoption of a formal complex systems framework, a transition being facilitated by large-scale data collection and new analytical tools. Here, we provide a theoretical framework to orient researchers around key concepts for this transition, notably emergence, interaction networks and resilience. Drawing on evolutionary theory, network theory and principles of homeostasis, we propose that organismal function is accomplished by the integration of regulatory mechanisms at multiple hierarchical scales, and that the disruption of this ensemble causes the phenotypic and functional manifestations of aging. We present key examples at scales ranging from sub-organismal biology to clinical geriatrics, outlining how this approach can potentially enrich our understanding of aging.

MESH TERMS: Geriatrics, Homeostasis, Systems Analysis, Biology

AUTHORS: Alan A. Cohen, Luigi Ferrucci, Tamàs Fülöp, Dominique Gravel, Nan Hao, Andres Kriete, Morgan E. Levine, Lewis A. Lipsitz, Marcel G. M. Olde Rikkert, Andrew Rutenberg, Nicholas Stroustrup, Ravi Varadhan

YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: Nature Aging

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1038/s43587-023-00527-6
================================================================================

TITLE: The Information Theory of Aging

ABSTRACT: Information storage and retrieval is essential for all life. In biology, information is primarily stored in two distinct ways: the genome, comprising nucleic acids, acts as a foundational blueprint and the epigenome, consisting of chemical modifications to DNA and histone proteins, regulates gene expression patterns and endows cells with specific identities and functions. Unlike the stable, digital nature of genetic information, epigenetic information is stored in a digital-analog format, susceptible to alterations induced by diverse environmental signals and cellular damage. The Information Theory of Aging (ITOA) states that the aging process is driven by the progressive loss of youthful epigenetic information, the retrieval of which via epigenetic reprogramming can improve the function of damaged and aged tissues by catalyzing age reversal.

MESH TERMS: Epigenesis, Genetic, DNA Methylation, Information Theory, Histones

AUTHORS: Yuancheng Ryan Lu, Xiao Tian, David A. Sinclair

YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: Nature Aging

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1038/s43587-024-00716-x
================================================================================

TITLE: The brain–body energy conservation model of aging

ABSTRACT: Aging involves seemingly paradoxical changes in energy metabolism. Molecular damage accumulation increases cellular energy expenditure, yet whole-body energy expenditure remains stable or decreases with age. We resolve this apparent contradiction by positioning the brain as the mediator and broker in the organismal energy economy. As somatic tissues accumulate damage over time, costly intracellular stress responses are activated, causing aging or senescent cells to secrete cytokines that convey increased cellular energy demand (hypermetabolism) to the brain. To conserve energy in the face of a shrinking energy budget, the brain deploys energy conservation responses, which suppress low-priority processes, producing fatigue, physical inactivity, blunted sensory capacities, immune alterations and endocrine 'deficits'. We term this cascade the brain-body energy conservation (BEC) model of aging. The BEC outlines (1) the energetic cost of cellular aging, (2) how brain perception of senescence-associated hypermetabolism may drive the phenotypic manifestations of aging and (3) energetic principles underlying the modifiability of aging trajectories by stressors and geroscience interventions.

MESH TERMS: Humans, Energy Metabolism, Aging, Brain, Cellular Senescence, Models, Biological, Animals

AUTHORS: Evan D. Shaulson, Alan A. Cohen, Martin Picard

YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: Nature Aging

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1042/CS20160897
================================================================================

TITLE: Redox theory of aging: implications for health and disease

ABSTRACT: Genetics ultimately defines an individual, yet the phenotype of an adult is extensively determined by the sequence of lifelong exposures, termed the exposome. The redox theory of aging recognizes that animals evolved within an oxygen-rich environment, which created a critical redox interface between an organism and its environment. Advances in redox biology show that redox elements are present throughout metabolic and structural systems and operate as functional networks to support the genome in adaptation to environmental resources and challenges during lifespan. These principles emphasize that physical and functional phenotypes of an adult are determined by gene-environment interactions from early life onward. The principles highlight the critical nature of cumulative exposure memories in defining changes in resilience progressively during life. Both plasma glutathione and cysteine systems become oxidized with aging, and the recent finding that cystine to glutathione ratio in human plasma predicts death in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients suggests this could provide a way to measure resilience of redox networks in aging and disease. The emerging concepts of cumulative gene-environment interactions warrant focused efforts to elucidate central mechanisms by which exposure memory governs health and etiology, onset and progression of disease.

FULL TEXT:

[Introduction - Redox theory of aging]
“Aging is a decline in plasticity of genome–exposome interaction that occurs as a consequence of differentiation and exposure memory systems.”

The redox theory of aging [1] was developed in response to improved understanding of oxidative stress [2] and advances in central redox theory outlined in the redox code [3,4]. The present article provides an update addressing the implications of redox theory in health and disease. We start with a summary of progress and refinement in the definition of oxidative stress after large-scale, double-blind free-radical scavenging antioxidant trials failed to show health benefits in humans. We briefly summarize the redox code, four principles by which oxidation–reduction (redox) mechanisms support life, and extend these concepts to the redox theory of aging. The redox theory was originally conceived as an extension of the redox hypothesis of oxidative stress, an alternative to free radical mechanisms of oxidative stress [5].

As the main points of the redox theory of aging, we discuss the importance of redox networks as an interface between an individual and his/her environment [6] and the evolution of exposure memory systems to allow animals to adapt to environmental conditions during lifespan to enhance survival and reproductive advantage [1]. The consequence of adaptation to lifelong exposures is a decline in flexibility and adaptability that underlies the theory.

A section is then provided on early life exposures as critical for physical and functional structures of adults, followed by a section on the importance of trace metals, some of which accumulate throughout life and cause progressive disruption of redox networks. This is followed by recent results suggesting that health of redox networks can be measured in terms of the ratio of the disulfide cystine (CySS) to the thiol glutathione (GSH), a ratio that predicts death as an outcome in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients [7]. Additional data are included to suggest that age-associated changes in redox network structures occur with many disease processes, including Type 2 diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, atrial fibrillation, and other proinflammatory or profibrotic diseases. A following section briefly addresses the implications of lifelong accumulation of exposure memory in regenerative medicine, a rapidly developing area of innovative therapeutics.

Finally, we summarize and extend these concepts to complex systems approaches in medicine. This includes introduction of cumulative gene–environment interactions during lifespan as a central logic to complex systems research. This is part of a systematic effort to understand lifelong exposures in human exposome research [8,9] and will advance understanding of lifelong exposures in health and disease outcome. Additional study of plasma CySS and CySS/GSH as measures of redox network health could yield new ways to measure and manage resilience during aging. We conclude with the need for development of a hierarchical set of principles linking exposure memory to health outcome as a way to guide personalized health and disease prevention strategies.



[Oxidative stress]
In 1985, Helmut Sies defined oxidative stress as an imbalance between prooxidants and antioxidants that resulted macromolecular damage [10]. The concept was popularized in news media and publications for non-scientific audiences and fueled development of a multibillion dollar antioxidant supplement industry. More than a billion dollars was invested in research to test antioxidants, and these generally showed that supplementation with free radical scavengers failed to provide health benefits. This caused confusion in the field and also contributed to a transition from oxidative stress of the early 1980s to the contemporary view of oxidative stress, as recently reviewed [11]. In the current definition, two aspects of oxidative stress are recognized, one with the original concept of macromolecular damage and the subsequently recognized disruption of redox signaling and control mechanisms leading to diseases of aging (Figure 1). The other encompasses physiologic levels of oxidant production, termed ‘eustress’, contributing to healthy longevity (Figure 1). The distinction between deleterious processes of oxidative stress and physiologic processes of eustress is important to maintain clarity in discussions of the broad range of oxidative reactions in redox biology. In the following sections, we discussed two aspects of oxidative stress further as the critical factors leading to differential aspects/consequences of aging and disease. Sies’s 1985 definition of oxidative stress included both 1-electron (free radical) and 2-electron (non-radical) oxidants; subsequent research often referred to reactive oxygen species (ROS) without discrimination of radical species, such as superoxide anion radical, from non-radical species, such as H2O2. The use of term ‘ROS’ is now discouraged, with the suggestion that specific oxidant names be used when possible and the general term ‘oxidant’ be used at other times [11]. Similarly, ‘antioxidants’ is a general term that includes different types of antioxidant chemicals, such as free radical scavenging vitamins (vitamin C and vitamin E) [12,13], singlet oxygen quenching dietary chemicals such as lycopene [14], and therapeutic thiol antioxidants such as N-acetylcysteine [15]. Science and medicine are best served by use of terminology defining specific antioxidants or types of antioxidants.

Two points are of central importance for the current discussion of the redox theory of aging and implications in health and disease. First, a substantial wealth of observational data shows evidence for oxidative stress for most major causes of human morbidity and mortality (Table 1). Thus, regardless of any specific arguments for or against oxidative stress [2], this data cannot be ignored. Second, all aspects of humans depend upon oxidation of foodstuffs for energy and maintenance of cellular NADPH pools to support detoxification and protection against environmental threats. Consequently, whether oxidative stress occurs is not a critical question; instead, critical questions are how to identify critical dysfunction of oxidant systems and how to develop useful interventions to minimize or reverse associated disease processes.

Denham Harmon proposed a free radical theory of aging in the 1950s [16], and observational studies and small interventional studies accumulated to justify large-scale double-blind interventional trials for many chronic and age-related diseases [17,18]. By the early 2000s, however, results from a sufficient number of these studies had accumulated to show that little to no significant health benefits occurred from supplementation with free radical scavenging antioxidants in humans [19,20]. Also by 2000, accumulating evidence supported a function for low concentrations of the oxidant H2O2 in redox signaling mechanisms [21,22]. Additionally, at about the same time, we found that the most abundant low molecular weight thiol/disulfide couples in plasma, glutathione/glutathione disulfide (GSH/GSSG), and cysteine/cystine (Cys/CySS) were not in thermodynamic equilibrium (Figure 2) [23]. Together, these results spawned considerable research into new directions of oxidative stress research.

Our finding of disequilibrium of GSH/GSSG and Cys/CySS led us to speculate that Cys residues in proteins could also be kinetically limited and this could be used for redox control [24]. Specifically, the reactivities of most thiols in proteins are similar to the thiols of GSH and Cys, so protein thiols are also likely to be kinetically controlled. We subsequently found this to be true in targeted studies of the thioredoxin (Trx)-1 system [5,25] as well as in the mitochondrial Trx-2 system [26,27]. More recent mass spectrometry studies also showed this to be correct for the steady-state oxidation of hundreds of specific protein cysteine residues in cell culture [28,29] and in mouse tissues [30]. Thus, in the period between 2000 and today, a major shift has occurred in the focus of oxidants/antioxidants balance from radical/radical scavenger balance to thiol/disulfide balance.

Together with recognition that plasma GSH/GSSG is oxidized in association with age and with Type 2 diabetes [31], knowledge of the disequilibrium of the GSH and Cys systems in plasma led to experimental studies of effects of variation in extracellular thiol/disulfide systems in human cells. Remarkably, cells in culture adjusted extracellular Cys/CySS redox potential (Eh, calculated from concentrations with the Nernst equation) [32] to the value found in young healthy human plasma [32]. Exposure to more reducing conditions caused cells to proliferate more rapidly while exposure to more oxidizing conditions caused cells to proliferate more slowly [33,34] and have increased sensitivity to apoptosis [34]. Thus, the studies established a fundamental importance of thiol/disulfide redox control in the functions of human cells. Moreover, the results showed that thiol/disulfide systems activate redox mechanisms previously attributed to oxidative stress. In 2002, we found that human plasma GSH and Cys redox couples were oxidized at different rates as a function of age [32]. The lack of balance between the GSH and Cys thiol antioxidant systems, the failure of the free radical scavenger trials, and the accumulating knowledge of thiol systems in redox signaling led to the proposal that oxidative stress should be redefined in terms of disruption of redox signaling and control [35]. The most critical aspect of this transition was the recognition of kinetic limitations in thiol/disulfide systems. Under all aerobic conditions, thiols undergo oxidation that is balanced in the steady state by reduction systems.



[Transition to redox biology]
A focus on oxidative stress transitioned to a more general focus on redox biology as knowledge of redox signaling mechanisms improved [35–38] and redox proteomics methods began to reveal the organization structure of the redox proteome [29]. An important contribution to this transition occurred as functions of NADPH oxidases in different organ systems and diseases was elucidated. In this, the term ‘oxidative stress’ was sometimes misused in that the oxidants produced were physiologic and not pathologic. Recently, the term ‘oxidative eustress’ has been recommended for use to describe beneficial production of oxidants so that the term ‘oxidative stress’ retains its original reference to adverse processes (Figure 1).

Along with improved understanding of oxidant production in redox signaling, studies of Trx systems in cell nuclei, cytoplasm, and mitochondria showed that subcellular compartments are maintained at different thiol/disulfide steady states [39]. The mitochondrial and cytoplasmic steady states also differ for GSH/GSSG, and the cytoplasmic Cys/CySS differs from the steady states for GSH/GSSG and the Trx system [39,40]. Thus, the results emphasize that kinetic limitations are widespread in thiol/disulfide systems and that differences exist in the characteristics of the central redox hubs [36]. A possible organizational structure is illustrated in Figure 3, based upon the scale-free hierarchical network proposed for metabolomics [41]. In this global view, environmental exposures selectively affect subnetworks of redox-sensitive elements, conceptualized as ‘redox modules’. These redox modules are maintained in steady state by endogenous reduction and oxidation systems. Each subcellular compartment has sources of reductants and oxidants. These include a relatively small number of NADPH-dependent reductases and a relatively small number of oxidants. In a bilateral hierarchical structure, these require only one additional level of secondary reductants and secondary oxidants to provide selective regulation of each of the 214,000-specific Cys encoded in the human genome [36]. Studies of proteins with nuclear import machinery shows selectivity in redox interactions [42], supporting this modular network structure. Similarly, import of proteins into mitochondria shows selectivity in redox reactions [37], and protein processing within the endoplasmic reticulum shows selectivity [43]. Targeted studies further show specificity in redox systems during signaling. For instance, redox signaling by NADPH oxidase was found to involve H2O2 and occur without detectable changes in either the Trx or GSH/GSSG systems [44]. KGF signaling in keratinocytes occurred with selective oxidation of cytoplasmic Trx1 without oxidation of mitochondrial Trx2 [45]. In contrast, TNF-α triggered oxidation of mitochondrial Trx2 without oxidation of cytoplasmic Trx1 [46]. Additionally, selective generation of H2O2 in cell nuclei by nuclear-targeted D-amino acid oxidase resulted in localized nuclear thiol oxidation without cytoplasmic oxidation [47]. Application of mass spectrometry-based redox proteomics has extended these concepts to show that the redox network structure has a central function in the tolerance and adaptability of an organism to diet and environmental challenges (Figure 3) [29]. Recognition of this redox interface between an individual and its environment [48] provided important background to formulation of the redox principles of the redox code.



[The redox code]
The redox code (Figure 4) is a set of principles for redox organization and function of metazoans [3]. Living organisms exist in stable thermodynamic disequilibrium with four basic characteristics: metabolic and structural organization, delineation from environment through semipermeable barriers, reproduction, and extraction and use of energy to maintain the other three characteristics. The first principle of the redox code is that energy systems are maintained at near-thermodynamic equilibrium through high-flux oxidation–reduction (redox) reactions involving NAD and NADP systems. The second principle is that these high-flux systems are connected to macromolecular structure and function through an array of reversible, kinetically-controlled switches in proteins involving oxidation, acetylation, phosphorylation, methylation, and other modifications. The third principle is that reversible activation/deactivation of these switches support spatial and temporal signaling and organization to control structure and function in cell differentiation and development. The fourth principle is that these interactive systems function as networks at molecular, cellular, and organ system levels to allow an individual genome to adapt during lifespan to environmental resources and challenges [3].



[The redox theory of aging]
The redox theory of aging was developed from the redox hypothesis of oxidative stress [5], a hypothesis to explain oxidative stress without requirement for free radicals. After more than 50 years of study, lack of firm support for the free radical theory of aging [16,49–51] provided impetus to extend the radical-free concepts of oxidative stress to formulate a radical-free theory of aging [1]. The theory (Figure 5) acknowledges that networks of the redox proteome and metabolome serve as an adaptive interface [29] to allow an individual to adapt during lifespan to environmental resources and challenges. The redox modifications of the proteome provide a system to sense, avoid, and defend against oxidants and other toxic chemicals from the environment. The theory considers the rise in atmospheric O2 beginning 2 billion years ago as a driving force for improved energy extraction machinery and evolution of multicellularity to avoid O2 toxicity. The theory accommodates the increase in Cys content of the proteome with evolution of complexity [52] to improve tolerance to different oxidative environments. The theory also accounts for genetic systems directing cellular differentiation and organ development as mechanisms to improve adaptability to the O2-rich atmosphere.

The theory thus interprets genetic systems for development and response to environment as exposure memory systems to allow an individual to adapt during lifespan to environmental resources and challenges [1]. Genetically encoded memory systems are emphasized because they were essential for transition of unicellular organisms into differentiated multicellular organisms. Other forms of exposure memory occur, such as changes in membrane lipid composition due to dietary lipid intake and variations in metal-bound structures and reactivities dependent upon metal ion exposures. Systematic studies are needed to evaluate contributions of different memory systems to long-term adaptability.

A natural consequence of use of memory systems for adaptability is that response to one challenge can decrease adaptability to other challenges. Over time, the use of these differentiation and environmental response systems results in decreased flexibility to accommodate additional environmental challenges. Therefore, aging is a decline in plasticity of gene–environment interactions that occurs as a consequence of differentiation and exposure memory (Figure 5). The integrated redox networks that are essential for cellular energetics, metabolic and structural organization, defense against environmental challenges, and reproduction, ultimately fail because of environmental challenges that cannot be accommodated [1]. Epigenetics and immune systems provide examples of systems that are used to provide memory of prior exposures. These systems allow a genome to adapt to environmental exposures during lifespan. Irreversible changes due to the operation of these systems ultimately limit their beneficial functions. Similarly, telomere shortening, cellular senescence, and stem cell exhaustion reflect cumulative memory of prior differentiation and responses to exposures.

The redox theory accounts for other characteristics of aging. For instance, ongoing oxidative challenges are opposed by responses of the thiol reducing systems. As any component of the redox network system becomes compromised, the entire network responds and becomes less tolerant to additional challenge. Thus, increased biomarkers of oxidative stress, such as hydroxynonenal and reactive carbonyls, and other general biomarkers of oxidative stress, are increased [53,54] even though they may not be directly related to the factors compromising the redox network structure. Oxidative modifications of slowly turning over proteins, as well as membrane lipids and DNA, create a burden decreasing the flexibility of the network to respond to additional challenges. Similarly, oxidative reactions as well as protein modifications from reactive carbonyls contribute to other hallmarks of aging, such as accumulation of macromolecular aggregates and failure of proteostasis, intercellular communication, and protective barriers. With this theory, genomic instability can occur due to failure of the redox network structures, including active defenses, repair systems, and adaptive memory systems.

Redox theory also incorporates mitochondrial support of bioenergetic functions in all O2-requiring cells, including maintenance of central ATP and NADPH pools. While ATP requirements are well known, less attention is given to NADPH, the primary reductant to maintain redox networks and also a primary precursor for H2O2 generation to maintain redox networks [3]. NADPH supply rates vary among cell types but are often much slower than rates of NADH supply to support mitochondrial ATP production. In liver, for instance, the maximal rate of NADPH supply is only 20% of the rate of NADH supply [55]. Furthermore, when mitochondrial ATP supply is insufficient to meet demand, glycolysis is stimulated. Both glycolysis and NADPH supply depend upon glucose-6-phosphate, and during hypoxia, glucose-6-phosphate is preferentially used for glycolytic ATP production at the expense of NADPH supply by the pentose phosphate pathway [55]. Detailed information is not available about the relative sensitivities of other systems controlling reversible switches within the proteomic networks. In particular, acetylation/deacetylation mechanisms controlling sirtuins depend upon the NADH/NAD system. Additionally, acetylation requires acetyl-CoA, and methylation requires S-adenosylmethionine; both of these precursors are linked to cellular energetics. Consequently, conditions that limit mitochondrial ATP production have a widespread impact on NADPH supply and other systems essential for maintenance of the redox network structures [55].

This dependence of both NADPH supply and ATP supply upon common precursors links bioenergetic responses to diet and oxidants to the flexibility of redox network structures. In other words, impaired mitochondrial ATP supply stimulates glycolysis, thereby limiting the pentose phosphate pathway supply of NADPH needed to maintain GSH and Trx functions. This links energy supply and antioxidant systems in their functions to accommodate environmental challenges. Growth factor signaling and nutrient regulation are ultimately linked to the same network structures controlled by mitochondria. The integration of these systems with epigenetic regulation, DNA repair, immunity, antioxidant defenses, and maintenance of cell populations leads to the perspective that strategies to delay aging, prevent and manage disease must address the cumulative memory of exposures as they affect mitochondrial function and redox control. At the global level, a primary focus for disease prevention must include the cumulative impact occurring at this genome–exposome interface [6]. For management of disease, a primary focus must include targeted support for these hubs controlling the steady-state dynamics of the redox networks [36]. For rejuvenation following loss of functions, a primary focus must be reversal of exposure memory that caused the loss of resilience [56].



[The redox interface in disease risk - Lifelong consequences of early exposures]
The implications of redox theory for disease prevention are closely aligned with developing concepts of the human exposome [8]. Most human disease is attributed to cumulative lifelong exposures [57]. The foremost implication is that early life exposures affect lifelong health because the signaling mechanisms in cellular differentiation and organogenesis were driven by redox mechanisms associated with the dramatic rise in atmospheric O2 early in metazoan evolution. In a practical sense, there are needs for greater precision in understanding the key exposures and windows of vulnerability, not just for severe, early onset disease but also for risk of chronic disease. Systematic studies are not available for a broad range of exposures, but epidemiologic and model system studies show early life exposures affect adult disease [58,59]. Efforts to measure human exposures and associated health outcomes will be greatly facilitated if the international research and technology communities embrace a ‘Human Exposome Project’ [8,60–63] (http://humanexposomeproject.com/) to complement the Human Genome Project (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Genome_Project) in advancing underlying causes of disease.

Several environmental agents, especially endocrine disruptors [64] and obesogens [65] have received considerable attention. An extensive list of poorly metabolized, persistent chemicals, including plasticizers, flame retardants, and insecticides, act as agonists and antagonists in receptor signaling. In the context of development, disrupted signaling can have lifelong consequences. Details are beyond the scope of the present article, but the implications are extensive. An example from the literature on smoking in pregnancy serves to illustrate the point. Nicotine binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, including α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors directing lung organogenesis [66]. In mouse studies, nicotine binding to the receptor during a critical developmental window increased airway length and decreased airway diameter, resulting in a persistent change in airway geometry and impaired lung function in the adults. This example emphasizes that the spectrum of impact of early exposures includes size and form of organ systems, as well as more commonly considered endocrine and immunologic responses. Many research programs are in place, such as HELIX (Human Early-Life Exposome), a European Union-funded project to integrate early life exposures and child health across Europe (http://www.projecthelix.eu), but the key point for contemporary medicine is that currently, there is no atlas linking early exposures to lifelong health and disease. Thus, an important implication of the redox theory is that there are needs to establish programs for ‘deep-sequencing’ of the human exposome [63], with the ultimate goal to be able to evaluate early exposures as beneficial or harmful in long-term health outcomes. Barriers include cost and lengthy longitudinal follow-up. Computational methods, such as a framework to address the large number (a million or more) human exposures [67], are beginning to provide ways to overcome the barriers, but will need to be extended to study of large populations and model systems.



[The redox interface in disease risk - Lifelong accumulation of metals]
A second important aspect of the redox interface involves environmental metals. Metal content in the soil varies considerably by geography, and metals entering the food chain reflect this variation. Several metals such as iron (Fe), copper, and manganese (Mn) are redox active and essential for bioenergetics and other metabolic functions. Others, such as zinc, are not redox active but essential in macromolecular structures. Others, such as cadmium (Cd), mercury, and lead, are toxic. For some metals such as Cd and Fe (in men and post-menopausal women), there are no effective elimination mechanisms.

The redox network structure is effective in accommodating moderate deficiencies of essential nutrients through widespread adjustments. For instance, decreased growth rate and decreased size can accommodate moderate deficiencies. Operation of a system at lower rates means that longer recovery time may be needed to deliver the same product, so response and recovery to stress can be delayed. But the key implication in redox theory is that excesses, which cannot be eliminated, are more disruptive by decreasing flexibility to adapt to other challenges. This is true for essential nutrients such as Fe and Mn, and also true for toxic metals such as Cd. A balloon provides a simple analogy. If inflated but not completely filled with air, the balloon is resilient to repeated deformation. If overfilled, however, the balloon has no remaining flexibility and easily fails. Redox systems with metals have this same character. With extensive number of relatively weak metal-binding sites in proteins, redox systems can accommodate a wide variety of metals and retain function. In redox theory, many of these binding sites are functional in the coupling of bioenergetics to macromolecular structure and function (second principle of the redox code) and show progressive impairment with excess. The major implication in health and disease is that excesses of metals must be avoided. This is true for individual metals including essential metals, and perhaps more importantly, is true for metals collectively.



[Plasma CySS/GSH as a mechanistic biomarker of death in coronary artery disease]
The recent finding that elevated cystine/glutathione (CySS/GSH) ratio in plasma predicts death as outcome in CAD patients [7] provides some of the strongest evidence for the importance of redox networks in human health. This study followed a cohort of cardiovascular disease patients over 7 years and showed that the ratio of plasma CySS to GSH predicted all-cause mortality after adjustment for all other known risk factors. Consideration of redox control mechanisms allows interpretation of this finding in terms of integrated redox networks. Molecular O2 is the ultimate oxidant for maintenance of bioenergetic functions and also for maintaining H2O2 pools for the redox proteome networks. NADPH oxidase (Nox)-4 in mouse mitochondria is a source of H2O2 generation in cardiomyocytes and promotes aging [68,69], providing a possible mechanism for oxidation with age. H2O2 serves in intracellular communication and control of macromolecular structure and function but is present at nanomolar concentrations and cannot be measured in a practical way in patients. CySS also oxidizes protein thiols, however, and has an advantage that it is present at micromolar concentrations in tissues and plasma and is readily measureable. Thus, CySS provides a surrogate to evaluate overall oxidation in vivo.

NADPH is the ultimate reductant to maintain the steady state of the redox proteome, but like H2O2, is difficult to measure in patients. In tissues, NADPH supports Trx and GSH systems, which directly interact with the redox proteome to maintain redox networks. Trx is released into plasma under some conditions but does not preserve its redox function outside the cell. In contrast, GSH is transported into plasma to maintain an interorgan system for redox homeostasis. The plasma GSH concentration can therefore provide a surrogate for the NADPH systems in tissue, which maintain the stable, non-equilibrium steady states of the redox networks. GSH is released from cells as a function of cell concentration [70] and is only a minor component in human plasma. While tissue concentrations of GSH are in the millimolar range, human plasma contains only low micromolar GSH [32,71]. The low concentration in plasma has been an important limitation to its usefulness in clinical medicine but this limitation can be overcome with appropriate sample collection and processing procedures [72]. There is evidence that ratio of GSH/GSSG is important in platelet activation [73], but the GSH concentration in human plasma is typically 3- to 10-fold lower than plasma Cys [23] and 50- to 100-fold lower than albumin thiol concentration [74]. Thus, we interpret the plasma GSH mostly as a reflection of the health of NADPH-dependent reduction systems in tissues rather than supporting important functions in the plasma compartment.

The mechanisms to control plasma CySS/GSH are summarized in Figure 6; long-term failure of these systems could contribute to the increase in CySS/GSH linked to death in the CAD patients. The central reactions controlling plasma CySS/GSH involve GSH export from tissue, with major contributions from liver and skeletal muscle, and CySS clearance by transporters, with xCT− having a major contribution ((1) in Figure 6) [75,76]. The interorgan CySS → Cys → GSH → GSSG → CySS cycle is kinetically limited at multiple sites, with different mechanisms for thiol oxidation, reduction of CySS to Cys, and control of GSH levels [77].

CySS is the most abundant low molecular weight disulfide in human plasma, formed from the oxidation of amino acid, Cys or from the degradation of GSH oxidation products [23]. CySS is increased in human plasma in association with demographic factors and health behaviors, e.g. age [32,71,78,79], obesity [80], cigarette smoking [78,81], and alcohol abuse [32,82], and also with multiple disease processes, e.g. HIV-1 infection [83], carotid intima media thickness [84], endothelial cell function [85], Type 2 diabetes [31], and age-related macular degeneration [86]. Mechanistic studies have addressed the impact of elevated extracellular CySS on cellular functions. Most studies address steady-state CySS/Cys redox potential; in these studies, however, CySS is the most abundant variable. High CySS activates NF-κB signaling in mouse aortic endothelial cells, increases expression of cell adhesion molecules, and activates monocyte adhesion [78]. The process involves oxidation of integrins and other plasma membrane proteins [78], stimulation of mitochondrial oxidant production, and increase in expression of proinflammatory cytokines [87]. High CySS increased IL-1β in U937 monocytes [88] and IL-1β-related transcripts in THP1 monocytes [89]. High CySS inhibited proliferation in Caco2 cells [33] and retinal pigment epithelial cells [34] but stimulated proliferation in lung fibroblasts [90]. High CySS blocked TGF-α signaling in CaCo2 cells [91] and activated apoptosis in retinal pigment epithelial cells [34]. These studies show that elevated concentrations of CySS as found in CAD patients activate processes that contribute to many disease processes and adverse health outcomes.



[Plasma CySS/GSH as a mechanistic biomarker of death in coronary artery disease - CySS/GSH as a mechanistic biomarker]
Combining the results of the mechanistic studies with the results on death in CAD patients leads to the interpretation that CySS/GSH could be a mechanistic biomarker relevant to CAD outcome and also a more general measure of the health of redox networks affecting many age-related diseases. In this interpretation, CySS provides a measure of the oxidant burden in the redox network and GSH provides a measure of the NADPH-dependent reductive capacity. In Figure 6, critical steps are identified that are possible targets for intervention. Nrf2 controls expression of the CySS transporter xCT−, a transcription factor controlling many redox systems [92]. Nrf2 activity is controlled by interaction with actin-associated inhibitory binding protein, KEAP-1, and small Maf proteins in nuclei. Perhaps most importantly, the maximal inducible Nrf2 activity decreases with age [93]. Thus, development of approaches to control this activity may enable control of redox networks to protect against disease and disease outcomes.

Much less is known about the reduction of CySS after transport into cells. Kinetic studies for plasma CySS following consumption of a high sulfur amino acid meal showed that the volume of distribution is equivalent to the total body water, indicating that the rate of reduction of CySS is slow relative to the rate of uptake. Within tissues, Trx and GSH-dependent systems have low CySS reductase activity [94], and recently, a Trx-related protein, Trp14, has been identified as a CySS reductase ((2) in Figure 6) [95]. The dependence upon CySS concentration indicates that the reductase activity may become saturated at higher CySS concentrations and thus limit the capability to remove excess CySS. Thus, mechanisms to enhance expression or activity of this system could provide another potential target to maintain or improve redox networks.

Many approaches have been used to enhance GSH concentrations in model systems and in humans; results have been mixed and details cannot be provided here. Most importantly, the interpretation that circulating GSH is an indirect surrogate for tissue NADPH ((3) in Figure 6) implies that focus on GSH, per se, may not be the best strategy. A relatively small number of NADPH supply systems provide most NADPH in tissues. These include glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) in the pentose phosphate pathway, the NADP-dependent malic enzyme (ME1), NADP-isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH2), and mitochondrial proton-translocating NAD(P)+ transhydrogenase (NNT). If limitation of the redox networks lies with the function of NADPH supply, then these would appear to be the most appropriate targets. The reductive hubs supported by NADPH may also be appropriate targets. Inhibition of the selenoproteins, Trx reductase 1 and 2, showed widespread protein oxidation [96]. These enzymes are sensitive to environmental toxicants such as Cd and reactive aldehydes like acrolein [97]. Interventions to enhance Trx reductases as well as GSSG reductase provide potential targets to support or restore redox networks.

In efforts to preserve or restore redox networks, attention must be given to diurnal variations in redox systems. The GSH and Cys redox systems, each undergoes diurnal variation, with greatest oxidation in the morning [98]. The GSH changes are delayed relative to the Cys changes and have lesser extent of variation. Additionally, the amplitude of variation of the Cys system was 1.4-fold greater in individuals >60 years compared with individuals <40 years [98]. Similarly, diurnal variations occur in oxidation of peroxiredoxins [99]. Whether such variations affect outcomes in CAD or other disease processes is unknown and warrants additional study.



[Implications for regenerative medicine]
As described in the previous sections, redox theory emphasizes the importance of early life and cumulative lifelong exposures as critical determinants of health and disease and directs attention to central hubs controlling the thiol/disulfide systems, which have been linked to health behaviors, disease, and death. Redox theory also has implications for regenerative medicine, i.e. research in biologics, medical devices, and combination products to regenerate, replace, or repair tissues and organs [1,56]. Advances in stem cell research and tissue engineering have catapulted forward regenerative medicine. Yet redox theory predicts that cumulative lifetime exposures and adaptive responses will result in tissue scaffolds with molecular and macromolecular scarring, such as damaged extracellular matrix, as well as mutations, senescent cells, abnormal cell populations and epigenetic changes, which must be addressed to enable tissue regeneration [56]. Preconditioning regimens are likely to be needed to address these molecular and macroscopic impediments to efficient repair and regeneration.

The age-associated decline and failure of lung function provide an example for consideration of this important subject. A conceptual overview of barriers to regeneration in the lungs, with approximately 40 cell types and complex anatomy and cell physiology, is available [100]. A broad spectrum of lung diseases occurs with multiple molecular pathways, anatomic diversities, temporal behaviors, and relative intensities of disease phenotypes [100–104]. Consequently, effective regeneration is likely to require conditioning approaches specific for disease processes and/or personalized exposure histories. These conditioning steps are needed to clear scars and replace dysfunctional extracellular matrix, eliminate mutated and senescent cells, reset adaptive systems, and reverse epigenetic marks. This conditioning will allow tissue engineers and stem cell biologists to induce new lung regeneration niches for expansion and development of architecture and cell populations to regenerate lung function [105].

Redox theory also emphasizes the role of spatial and temporal redox control in the developmental programs. Recapitulation of polarity of O2 delivery, pH control and H2O2 and redox potential gradients, in organogenesis, as well as avoidance of xenobiotic chemicals affecting critical receptor signaling will be essential for full functional recovery of airway epithelium and alveolar lined spaces. Thus, an implication of redox theory is that emphasis on understanding the human exposome and exposure memory will not only enhance ability to prevent and manage human health and disease, but also help usher in the promising new approaches to regenerate, rather than stop and repair, organ system functions.



[Summary and perspective]
Loscalzo et al. [106] presented a complex systems approach to disease, which anticipates many of the conclusions derived from redox theory. They note that a single genetic change in sickle cell disease results in multiple disease phenotypes and that in cardiovascular disease, multiple etiologies result in a single disease. Redox theory provides a foundation for cause–effect relationships in complex systems, starting from individual genetics and sequentially incorporating environmental effects within developmental programs, growth, and maturation. From this perspective, the exposome can be viewed as an integral of gene–environment interactions over a lifespan. This provides logic for development and function of complex systems. An individual is a complex system of cell types, tissues, and organs, which work together as a functional unit. The design of the functional unit is molded during development, growth, and maturation, through responses of subnetworks to environmental exposures. This sequence of exposures and cumulative responses determines subsequent performance of the functional unit, from cognitive to physical capabilities as well as responses to food intake, infection, and other exposures.

The interaction of organ systems within the overall network is responsible for onset of specific diseases and to the most common outcome, multimorbidity [107]. In broad terms, if the lung function is impaired, other organ systems must accommodate the decreased capabilities for O2 delivery, CO2 elimination, and respiratory pH control. Poor lung function must affect functions in the heart, peripheral vasculature, kidneys, intestines, and other organ systems. Thus, as shown by Barnett et al. [107], more than 70% of patients with COPD have other chronic health conditions. A central implication of redox theory is that multimorbidity is a general consequence of morbidity. Each organ system is dependent upon all other systems to optimize utilization of environmental resources and protect against environmental threats, so declining function of one system necessarily adds strain and decreases adaptability of other systems. The integrated nature provides stability and can obscure underlying disease etiologies. Ultimately, an atlas of network responses to common exposure–outcome relationships will help early diagnosis and development of interventions to delay or prevent decline in network functions.

More specific implications of redox theory for human health and disease are summarized in Table 2. The importance of early life exposures on health outcomes is well recognized, but details are missing. For instance, if adult size represents an adaptive influence of environment on individual genetics during development, then optimized adult health may depend more upon behaviors and exposures matched to this gene–environment interaction than to adult size, per se. Redox theory points to a need for systematic studies of effects of essential nutrients and physiologic parameters on adult phenotype as a foundation for consideration of possible effects of more recently introduced pesticides and personal care products. Without such details, personalized health management will remain tied to population averages and not progress to desired personalized level.

Redox theory also emphasizes the cumulative impact of exposures within the adaptive network structures (Table 2). A natural consequence of decline in resilience is that excesses of all types must be viewed with caution, whether those include excessive time on a sofa or excessive super-marathons. Strenuous physical conditioning, fasting, immunizations, and other common stressors warrant further study to understand when a stressor enhances resilience as opposed to causing a loss of resilience. Appropriate life-stage adjustment of behaviors and exposures can be expected to preserve resilience with age (Table 2).

The availability of CySS/GSH as a potential measure of the fitness of an individual’s redox networks has implications for interventions to improve individual resilience (Table 2). Widespread utility of CySS/GSH is limited by sample collection needs for GSH, but plasma CySS is readily measurable and provides predictive value independent of GSH. As indicated above, some options are available to limit CySS accumulation, and studies in patients with cystinuria further suggest that restriction of methionine intake could be beneficial.

Finally, the redox theory of aging reveals a need to elucidate the central principles of exposure memory, i.e. the central guidelines for lifelong exposures to optimize an individual exposome for healthy longevity (Table 2). Cellular differentiation and development in animals are ultimately linked to the benefits of having oxidizable food sources for energy and metabolism and control systems to manage O2 delivery, oxidative stress, and environmental threats. Simple principles of the redox code are followed in redox organization and function, and the resulting redox networks and exposure memory systems effectively account for the hallmarks of aging. A critical need exists to elucidate the hierarchy of exposure memory systems that the genome uses to sense, respond, and remember environmental resources and challenges. This includes the signaling structure to maintain mitochondrial integrity, bioenergetics, and oxidative and xenobiotic defenses, as well as optimized systems for metabolic regulation and regenerative capacity, DNA repair, and immunity.

A central focus for etiology of complex disease is refined, therefore, to a need to understand the logic for early environmental responses that affect adult health and disease risk. When viewed as an integral of gene–environment interactions over lifespan, the critical nature of these early exposures in adult disease risk is magnified. Human expo-some research is poised to elucidate these central mechanisms of exposure memory and support use of this knowledge to improve individual health and provide strategies to prevent and manage disease.



MESH TERMS: Aging, Biomarkers, Coronary Artery Disease, Gene-Environment Interaction, Glutathione, Humans, Metals, Models, Biological, Oxidation-Reduction, Oxidative Stress, Regenerative Medicine, Salivary Cystatins

KEYWORDS: Early life exposure, disease prevention, healthy longevity, personalized medicine, plasma thiol and disulfide, sequencing human exposome

AUTHORS: Young-Mi Go, Dean P. Jones

YEAR: 2017
JOURNAL: Clinical Science

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2300624120
================================================================================

TITLE: A step toward precision gerontology: Lifespan effects of calorie and protein restriction are consistent with predicted impacts on entropy generation

ABSTRACT: Understanding aging is a key biological goal. Precision gerontology aims to predict how long individuals will live under different treatment scenarios. Calorie and protein restriction (CR and PR) extend lifespan in many species. Using data from C57BL/6 male mice under graded CR or PR, we introduce a computational thermodynamic model for entropy generation, which predicted the impact of the manipulations on lifespan. Daily entropy generation decreased significantly with increasing CR level, but not PR. Our predictions indicated the lifespan of CR mice should increase by 13 to 56% with 10 to 40% CR, relative to ad libitum-fed animals. This prediction was broadly consistent with the empirical observation of the lifespan impacts of CR in rodents. Modeling entropy fluxes may be a future strategy to identify antiaging interventions.

FULL TEXT:

[Results - First Law Assessment of Cellular Metabolism Subsystem.]
Especially in the biothermodynamics field, the internal energy content of a chemical compound is called enthalpy (19). The standard enthalpy of formation (Δh°f) values of the major chemical components in the diets and their oxidation reaction products (SI Appendix, Table S1) were used to calculate the daily enthalpy of oxidation reaction (Δhrxn) of the diets for CR and PR groups. In this study, Δhrxn refers to the extracted energy (kJ) at the cellular level (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Δhrxn levels were higher in mice fed PR compared to CR due to the reduced protein levels being replaced by carbohydrate while maintaining the same total calorie intake across the PR groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). This causes very similar work outputs (kJ) fueled by cellular metabolism of the PR groups (19.5 to 20.2 kJ). In the CR groups, average daily total work (kJ) output fueled by the cellular metabolism decreased with the increasing CR level (R-square > 0.99, P < 0.05). The CR animals might compensate for low-energy input with decreased total work performance (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A and B). There was no significant relationship between average daily total work (kJ) output fueled by the cellular metabolism and level of PR. The ratio of this work to the net extracted energy by the cellular metabolism subsystem was defined as the first law efficiency. There was no significant relationship between the average daily first law efficiency (%) and energy intakes (kJ) or restriction levels (%) of CR and PR groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 A and C).



[Results - Second Law Assessments of Cellular Metabolism Subsystem.]
Within the context of the second law of thermodynamics, the exergy term basically refers to the “maximum useful work potential” that a system can produce if it is brought to thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings. Hence, it is a system–environment combination property. Unlike energy, exergy is always wasted in irreversible processes and this wasted work potential is defined as exergy destruction (Exdest) (2). In the current study, the exergy values (kJ) of chemical molecules of diet, adipose tissue and oxidation reactions’ products were calculated based on the mole numbers of molecules and the daily average body temperature of CR and PR animals. All these calculated values were used in exergy balance (Eq. 17), which was equated around the cellular metabolism subsystem (Fig. 1) to find the daily Exdest of the animals. One of the ultimate aims of this study was the calculation of daily entropy generation, Sgen, (kJ/K) via cellular metabolism. Hence, daily average body temperature and calculated daily Exdest values were used for this purpose via Eq. 19 as explained in the Materials and Methods.

The second law efficiency was defined in this study as the ratio of work flux fueled by cellular metabolism to the maximum theoretical exergy (Eq. 18). The average daily second law efficiency of CR groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S4B) was significantly related to the exergy input of CR groups (R-square > 0.78, P < 0.05). However, no relationship was found with the PR groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S4D). In the present study, internal work components (Wint,1 + Wint,3) had a dominant effect on the total work expense that was fueled by the cellular metabolism subsystem and these work components had a decreasing contribution with increasing CR level (SI Appendix, Fig. S5A). In contrast, the exergy input and corresponding internal work components fueled by cellular metabolism across the PR levels and 24 h ad libitum (24AL) were very similar (SI Appendix, Fig. S5B). The effect of external (muscle) work (Wext) on second law efficiency was very low under both CR and PR conditions (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 A and B). A major increase (more than four times) in average daily external (muscle) work was observed in both CR and PR groups exposed to restriction levels higher than 9.6% probably because of increased hunger (20, 21) which has been linked to the resultant food anticipatory activity (22) (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 A and B).

The calculated daily entropy generation (kJ/K) values by using the daily exergy destruction values are given in SI Appendix, Fig. S6 A and B. The average daily entropy generation was found to decrease with increasing CR level (%) (Fig. 2A and SI Appendix, Fig. S6A) or in other words decreasing exergy intake (R-square > 0.99, P < 0.05). Similarly in another thermodynamic assessment study (11), the entropy generated by the cellular metabolism subsystem increased with increments in the average exergy intake (R-square > 0.99, P < 0.05) in obese and lean rats. On the other hand, for the PR groups, there was no significant relationship between the average daily entropy generation and PR levels (%) (P > 0.05) (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Fig. S6B) but if we consider the exergy intake (kJ) of PR groups instead of restriction levels (Fig. 2C), a significant relationship with entropy generation rates is clear (R-square > 0.93, P < 0.05).

The average daily entropy generation (kJ/K) by the CR groups was positively related to the work output fueled by the cellular metabolism (kJ) (R-square > 0.97, P < 0.05) (Fig. 2A and SI Appendix, Fig. S2). A similar linear relationship between work output and entropy generation was computationally estimated using experimental energetic datasets (23–26). Both internal (i.e., respiration, cardiac functions, signal transmission through the neurons etc.) and external or muscular (i.e., energy consumption for the skeletal muscle contraction to move external objects or the animals’ own body) work are irreversible processes in a living system that, as the second law of thermodynamics states, result in entropy generation. No relationship between average daily total work output and entropy generation was observed under PR (P > 0.05).

The entropy generation hypothesis suggests that animals die when their entropy generation (or in other words, molecular disorder) levels reach a certain level (1). The problem is that the level at death is unknown. However, we do know the average lifespan of unrestricted C57BL/6 mice and hence we can combine that with the calculated average daily entropy generation rates derived here to estimate the lifespan entropy in that situation, and then quantitatively predict the impacts of altered entropy generation rates (Fig. 2A) on the expected lifespans of CR and PR mice. Table 1 shows that, with 9.6 to 44% restriction in calorie intake, the predicted lifespan increases by 91 to 405 d compared to the 24AL group. PR mice have a higher energy or exergy intake, and higher entropy generation rates than those of mice fed an equivalent CR level (Fig. 2 A and B). As a result, the predicted lifespan increments of the PR groups (51 to 154 d) were lower compared to the CR groups.



[Discussion - First and Second Law Efficiencies.]
From the first law efficiency calculations, approximately 37% of the net daily food energy extracted by the cellular metabolism was used to fuel internal and muscle work for the 24AL group. Note the first law efficiency value does not include the contribution of adipose tissue and organs’ to work fueling. Maximum enthalpy efficiencies (i.e., first law efficiencies) for a variety of murine skeletal muscles were previously calculated as between 26% and 48% (27). These support the calculations performed here and are comparable to the first law efficiency of muscle work. Additionally, these values were close to experimental result of tortoise muscle energetic efficiency reported as 35% (28). The second law efficiencies were lower than the first law efficiencies (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 A–D) because the first law efficiency concept does not consider the best possible performance as a reference. However, in the second law efficiency assessments, the measure of actual performance is compared to the best possible performance under the same conditions. Second law efficiency evaluations can give an indication of system performance under reversible conditions. Correspondingly, if the second law efficiency is low, that means there is high irreversibility, and each irreversible process contributes to the entropy generation by the system. Therefore, an inverse relationship between second law efficiency and entropy generation rate would be expected. In the PR animals, where exergy content was very similar, this expected significant inverse relationship was found (R-square > 0.93, P < 0.05). However, in the CR groups fed variable exergy content, average daily entropy generation had a much stronger relationship with average daily exergy input (R-square > 0.99, P < 0.05), instead of with the average daily second law efficiencies. Because, with the decrement of exergy intake, total work outputs also decreased, and this caused the general decreasing trend in second law efficiencies, which is the ratio of these two variables. In our study, the inverse relationship between second law efficiency and entropy generation was observed when the exergy input was similar for the compared systems.



[Discussion - Implications of Entropy Generation Changes for Lifespan.]
The calculated lifespan increment percentages were compared with values from the literature, including the experimental lifespan increment percentages and the corresponding CR levels (18, 29) (Fig. 3A). Based on this comparison, the effect of CR level on lifespan was not as high as computationally predicted lifespans based on the average daily entropy generation (Fig. 3A). There are several potential explanations for this discrepancy. In the current study, estimates of the entropy generation were based on the experimental data obtained over 3 mo, with the animals 8 mo old at the end of the study. In the lifespan calculation, we assumed that the calculated average daily entropy generation is maintained as same during the entire life of animals and the lifespan predictions were made based on this assumption. However, in reality, the average daily entropy generation may vary with time under restriction making the computational predictions more optimistic than the experimental lifespan results (Fig. 3A). The discrepancy would be consistent with entropy generation accelerating at later ages.

Dietary protein percent values in the study of Speakman et al. (18) were converted to PR percentages based on the baseline from our study, these were then compared with our computational results in Fig. 3B. It seems that PR level had a very heterogenic/random effect on the lifespan increment based on literature (18). While the calculated predicted lifespan increments for CR diets were higher, calculations for the PR diets were within the range of the literature values (Fig. 3 A and B). The regression equations were extracted from studies to find the empirical relationship between the % increase in lifespan and CR and PR (18). In the current study, these equations are also evaluated to calculate lifespan day predictions, and these days are compared with the introduced thermodynamical modeling predictions (Table 1). Our model predicts a higher lifespan for all CR and PR groups bar the 39.6% PR (Table 1). The difference in calculated lifespan days was higher where the CR was higher; however, in the PR animals, the difference in lifespan days decreased with increasing restriction levels (Fig. 3 A and B).

Notably, the relationship between PR level and extension of lifespan was negative (Fig. 3C). The effect of PR on the lifespan of rodents has been previously reviewed in detail (18). Although diets with reduced protein content may increase the median lifespan (17, 30), the effect is only apparent with much lower levels of protein than tested here. This previous analysis emphasized that PR is effective but over a different range of restriction levels than CR works (18). This current computational research revealed a similar observation (Fig. 3C). With regard to the PR groups, although the protein amount was decreased, the same energy or exergy content was provided to all PR groups, therefore “predicted lifespan increment percentages” of these groups were also close to each other and had a significant linear relationship with exergy intake of PR groups (R-square > 0.94, P < 0.05) but had no significant relationship with the PR percentage levels (P > 0.05) (Fig. 3C). However, a strong linear relationship (R-square > 0.99, P < 0.05) between the predicted lifespan increment percentages and CR level was observed. This result parallels the suggestion that the effect of food restriction on lifespan is primarily due to reduced calories and not reduced protein intake (18). Refining the prediction using modeling of empirical data over a more extended period would be necessary to test this idea, but such data are currently not available.

The current data show that the impacts of CR and PR on the rate of entropy generation produced mean lifespan estimates that are broadly consistent with the actual impacts of these manipulations on published mean lifespan in rodents. Hence the data provide some support for the entropy generation model for lifespan and aging as originally proposed by Schrodinger in 1944 (1). This work therefore establishes as a concept the idea that quantifying entropy generation rates may provide a framework for evaluating diverse manipulations that potentially impact lifespan. Moreover, understanding the physiological processes that are connected to entropy changes will potentially provide a mechanism for identifying novel targets for aging interventions. Under fixed dietary conditions, individuals vary in how long they live and also in their individual entropy generation rates. A major goal for future work is to delineate whether these individual differences in entropy generation and lifespan are connected, or whether individual lifespan is dominated by unpredictable stochastic events. If individual lifespan is predictable from individual variation in entropy generation this would yield the potential to predict when an individual will die—a key goal in precision gerontology.



[Conclusion]
Life generates entropy (disorder), but the rate at which it does so is not the same across all conditions. Entropy probably accumulates because the cost to reverse its increase is too great. Schrodinger (1) suggested that ultimately we age and die because of this entropy accumulation. In other words, we die because the bodily system becomes so disordered that it can no longer sustain the functions we recognize as living. This idea has never been directly tested by quantifying the rate of entropy accumulation across different conditions and seeing if that matches the differences in observed lifespan. Here, we performed such entropy generation calculations for mice engaged in CR and PR and showed that the broad patterns of lifespan response to these manipulations can be predicted from entropy generation rates consistent with Schrodinger’s hypothesis (1)



[Materials and Methods]
Data from male C57BL/6 mice undergoing 3 mo of graded CR or PR were adapted for thermodynamic assessment (22, 31–33). Control mice, fed ad libitum for 12 and 24 h are referred to as 12AL and 24AL groups, respectively. While designing the CR experiments, the average levels of restrictions were stated as 10, 20, 30, and 40% CR relative to their individual baseline 12AL intakes prior to the CR phase of the study. However, if the food intake of 12AL, 10, 20, 30, and 40% CR groups are compared relative to the average intake of the 24AL group in the final week, the approximate values of the percentage levels of restrictions become 9.6, 17, 24, 35, and 44%, respectively (31). In the PR study, the control group was fed 12AL with the same diet, 20% protein, as the CR study (31). Accordingly, restriction levels of the PR groups were calculated as 29.6, 39.6, and 49.6% relative to the 24AL group, respectively. PR diets were formulated by substituting the reduced protein with carbohydrates; the three PR diets were calorically equal (31). The following assumptions were considered while carrying out the analysis:

The resting metabolic rate (RMR) was assumed to be the same as the total internal work (Wint,total). Internal work performance, which was depicted as “internal work sink subsystem” in Fig.1, was fueled by both adipose tissue and the utilized organs, in addition to cellular metabolism.

Energy expense of organ investment (Wint,1) was part of the total internal work cost and fueled only with energy coming from the metabolism of nutrients.

On some occasions, a fraction of the energy provided by the food was accumulated in the adipose tissue (Eadipose). Otherwise, adipose tissue functioned as an internal energy source and provided energy to fuel a part of the internal work (Wint,2).

All the energy obtained from organ utilization fueled part of the internal work (Wint,4).

In the external (muscular) work (Wext) calculations, work against friction is not accounted for.

The residual internal work energy expense was calculated after subtracting Wint,1, Wint,2 and Wint,4 from the total internal work (Wint,total). The residual internal work (Wint,3) energy expense was fueled with the energy coming from the cellular metabolism.

It was assumed that the energy utilized from the adipose tissue and organs entered the internal work sink subsystem and used only for work; however, the total internal heat output (Qint,total) was fueled only by cellular metabolism.

According to the information provided by the supplier of the mice (Charles-River), the average 50% survival rate for male C57BL/6J mice fed a diet similar to that used in the CR study was around 720 d. In the current study, this lifespan was assumed to be the same for control (24AL) groups.



MESH TERMS: Male, Animals, Mice, Mice, Inbred C57BL, Longevity, Entropy, Diet, Protein-Restricted, Geriatrics

KEYWORDS: aging, calorie restriction, entropy, protein restriction

AUTHORS: Ayşe Selcen Semerciöz-Oduncuoğlu, Sharon E. Mitchell, Mustafa Özilgen, Bayram Yilmaz, John R. Speakman

YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1093/geront/29.2.183
================================================================================

TITLE: A Continuity Theory of Normal Aging

ABSTRACT: Continuity Theory holds that, in making adaptive choices, middle-aged and older adults attempt to preserve and maintain existing internal and external structures; and they prefer to accomplish this objective by using strategies tied to their past experiences of themselves and their social world. Change is linked to the person's perceived past, producing continuity in inner psychological characteristics as well as in social behavior and in social circumstances. Continuity is thus a grand adaptive strategy that is promoted by both individual preference and social approval.

MESH TERMS: Adaptation, Psychological, Aging, Humans, Psychological Theory, Social Adjustment

AUTHORS: R. C. Atchley

YEAR: 1989
JOURNAL: The Gerontologist

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1093/geront/34.6.756
================================================================================

TITLE: Re-engaging the Disengagement Theory of Aging: On the History and Assessment of Theory Development in Gerontology

ABSTRACT: While "disengagement theory" is today largely discounted, it has an important place in the history of gerontological explanation. First we analyze the historical context of this theory. Second, we examine its long-term contributions and deficiencies in terms of finer criteria--standards which we suggest should be used in evaluating current, and future, theories in social gerontology.

MESH TERMS: Aged, Aging, Geriatrics, History, 20th Century, Human Development, Humans, Psychological Theory, Social Isolation

AUTHORS: W. A. Achenbaum, V. L. Bengtson

YEAR: 1994
JOURNAL: The Gerontologist

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1093/geront/4.4.195
================================================================================

TITLE: The Immunologic Theory of Aging

ABSTRACT: None

MESH TERMS: Aging, Allergy and Immunology, Humans, Rats

KEYWORDS: AGING, IMMUNOLOGY, RATS

AUTHORS: R. L. Walford

YEAR: 1964
JOURNAL: The Gerontologist

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1111/acel.70207
================================================================================

TITLE: The Role of Selection for Function in Aging and Chronic Diseases: A Novel Evolutionary Perspective

ABSTRACT: Aging, and by extension age-related diseases, has traditionally been understood through classical evolutionary genetic models, such as the mutation accumulation and antagonistic pleiotropy theories. However, these frameworks primarily focus on the declining efficacy of organismal-level selection against mutations with deleterious effects in late life. Here, we propose a novel hypothesis: many chronic diseases associated with aging may emerge, at least in part, as a result of selection acting at lower organizational levels, including non-replicative biological entities, enabled by the relaxation of selective pressures that constrained within-organism evolutionary processes in early life. This hypothesis is built on the recently proposed concept of selection for function that extends the evolutionary process to non-replicative entities. While Darwinian selection acting at the organismal level strongly constrains within-organism evolution during an organism's reproductive lifespan, these constraints weaken with age. As a consequence, lower-level non-replicative entities, such as benign and malignant tumors, atherosclerotic plaques, and neurodegenerative aggregates, may experience a form of selection that favors those with increased stability, organization, and long-term persistence, sometimes at the cost to host fitness. These entities do not evolve via long-term differential reproduction, but rather certain configurations of their structure persist preferentially over others due to environmental constraints, microenvironmental selection, and internal stabilization mechanisms. Understanding aging through the lens of selection for function at the level of internal non-replicative entities provides new insights into the evolution of chronic diseases and opens novel therapeutic avenues aimed at disrupting internal functional organization, rather than merely targeting cellular proliferation/abnormalities or disease symptoms.

AUTHORS: Antoine M. Dujon, Klara Asselin, Jean François Lemaître, Jean‐Pascal Capp, Pascal Pujol, Beata Ujvari, James DeGregori, Aurora M. Nedelcu, Frédéric Thomas

YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: Aging Cell

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1152/physrev.1998.78.2.547
================================================================================

TITLE: The Free Radical Theory of Aging Matures

ABSTRACT: The free radical theory of aging, conceived in 1956, has turned 40 and is rapidly attracting the interest of the mainstream of biological research. From its origins in radiation biology, through a decade or so of dormancy and two decades of steady phenomenological research, it has attracted an increasing number of scientists from an expanding circle of fields. During the past decade, several lines of evidence have convinced a number of scientists that oxidants play an important role in aging. (For the sake of simplicity, we use the term oxidant to refer to all "reactive oxygen species," including O2-., H2O2, and .OH, even though the former often acts as a reductant and produces oxidants indirectly.) The pace and scope of research in the last few years have been particularly impressive and diverse. The only disadvantage of the current intellectual ferment is the difficulty in digesting the literature. Therefore, we have systematically reviewed the status of the free radical theory, by categorizing the literature in terms of the various types of experiments that have been performed. These include phenomenological measurements of age-associated oxidative stress, interspecies comparisons, dietary restriction, the manipulation of metabolic activity and oxygen tension, treatment with dietary and pharmacological antioxidants, in vitro senescence, classical and population genetics, molecular genetics, transgenic organisms, the study of human diseases of aging, epidemiological studies, and the ongoing elucidation of the role of active oxygen in biology.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Animals, Antioxidants, Free Radicals, Humans, Oxidation-Reduction, Species Specificity

AUTHORS: KENNETH B. BECKMAN, BRUCE N. AMES

YEAR: 1998
JOURNAL: Physiological Reviews

================================================================================
DOI: 10.1182/blood.2021014299
================================================================================

TITLE: Telomeres, aging, and cancer: the big picture

ABSTRACT: The role of telomeres in human health and disease is yet to be fully understood. The limitations of mouse models for the study of human telomere biology and difficulties in accurately measuring the length of telomere repeats in chromosomes and cells have diverted attention from many important and relevant observations. The goal of this perspective is to summarize some of these observations and to discuss the antagonistic role of telomere loss in aging and cancer in the context of developmental biology, cell turnover, and evolution. It is proposed that both damage to DNA and replicative loss of telomeric DNA contribute to aging in humans, with the differences in leukocyte telomere length between humans being linked to the risk of developing specific diseases. These ideas are captured in the Telomere Erosion in Disposable Soma theory of aging proposed herein.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Animals, DNA, DNA Damage, Disease Models, Animal, Humans, Mutation, Neoplasms, Telomerase, Telomere, Telomere Shortening

AUTHORS: Peter M. Lansdorp

YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: Blood

================================================================================
DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.671208
================================================================================

TITLE: The Danaid Theory of Aging

ABSTRACT: The classical evolutionary theories of aging suggest that aging evolves due to insufficient selective pressure against it. In these theories, declining selection pressure with age leads to aging through genes or resource allocations, implying that aging could potentially be stalled were genes, resource allocation, or selection pressure somewhat different. While these classical evolutionary theories are undeniably part of a description of the evolution of aging, they do not explain the diversity of aging patterns, and they do not constitute the only possible evolutionary explanation. Without denying selection pressure a role in the evolution of aging, we argue that the origin and diversity of aging should also be sought in the nature and evolution of organisms that are, from their very physiological make up, unmaintainable. Drawing on advances in developmental biology, genetics, biochemistry, and complex systems theory since the classical theories emerged, we propose a fresh evolutionary-mechanistic theory of aging, the Danaid theory. We argue that, in complex forms of life like humans, various restrictions on maintenance and repair may be inherent, and we show how such restrictions are laid out during development. We further argue that there is systematic variation in these constraints across taxa, and that this is a crucial factor determining variation in aging and lifespan across the tree of life. Accordingly, the core challenge for the field going forward is to map and understand the mosaic of constraints, trade-offs, chance events, and selective pressures that shape aging in diverse ways across diverse taxa.

FULL TEXT:

[Introduction]
An evolutionary theory of aging should answer two key questions. First, why could aging evolve, given that, all else being equal, an individual’s fitness should be maximized by living as long as possible? Second, why do patterns of aging vary across the tree of life the way they do (Omotoso et al., 2021)? The classical evolutionary theories of aging have long provided a convincing answer to the first question (Medawar, 1952; Williams, 1957; Hamilton, 1966; Kirkwood, 1977). However, as we learn more about the diversity of aging patterns across the tree of life and the diversity of mechanisms, it is increasingly clear that the classical theories do not provide a sufficient answer to the second question. Additionally, other answers to the first question are possible. Here, we propose a novel theory, The Danaid Theory of aging, that builds on existing theory, links mechanisms with evolution, and can simultaneously answer both questions. It integrates the previous theories with a modern understanding of development, aging biology, complex systems, and genetic control, contextualizing when previous theories may be key drivers, and when other forces may dominate the evolution of aging and lifespan.

The Danaid theory suggests that there are taxon-specific constraints on the ability of organisms to maintain themselves indefinitely, often arising from the inherently complex systems nature of organisms. This is complementary to a declining force of natural selection with age, but does not depend on it. Accordingly, we propose a framework in which specific types of mechanistic constraints complement the declining force of selection to explain the diversity of aging patterns, showing that evolutionary and mechanistic theories are inextricably intertwined. We start by establishing some preliminaries—a taxonomy of aging theories, definitions of aging, etc. Readers who wish to dive straight into the subject matter may wish to proceed directly to Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution. We then address the necessary elements of evolutionary theory, followed by a consideration of how systemic constraints could influence aging, and a discussion of how such constraints may emerge from the complex nature of life. Finally, we consider how this theory interacts with our knowledge about the diversity of aging processes across taxa.



[Preliminaries - A Taxonomy of Aging Theories]
While the classical theories of aging are often listed as mutation accumulation (Medawar, 1952), antagonistic pleiotropy (Williams, 1957), and the disposable soma theory (Kirkwood, 1977) (in large part to pay hommage to three landmark papers in the field), we believe there is now a clear consensus for a new way to think about these classical theories, as shown in Figure 1. This taxonomy of theories is not meant to be exhaustive, but does recognize other, more recent theoretical advances. On the one hand, there are the programmed/adaptive theories of aging (Goldsmith, 2012; Libertini, 2015; Mitteldorf, 2018). Though they remain popular with molecular biologists and some physicists, they have been debunked by evolutionary biologists, including ourselves and others (Austad, 2004; Cohen, 2015; Kowald and Kirkwood, 2016). We do not consider them futher.

The classical theories of aging all stem from a single principle, the declining force of selection with age (“selection shadow”): because future events cannot affect past reproduction, as organisms reproduce selection lessens with progressing age (Hamilton, 1966; Wensink et al., 2017a). Within this broad principle, there are trade-off/optimality theories (Stearns, 1989; Parker and Smith, 1990; Partridge and Barton, 1993) and mutation accumulation (Medawar, 1952). Trade-off/optimality theories hold that aging is a byproduct of maximizing fitness, generally through trade-offs between fertility/reproduction/condition early in life and the ability of the organism to maintain itself indefinitely. Mutation accumulation does not invoke an advantage linked to aging, but quite simply posits that weak selection against late-acting deleterious mutations increases the load of mutations with late-life-specific effects.

Within optimality theories, antagonistic pleiotropy (Williams, 1957) posits a genetic mechanism whereby a single allele might have constrasting effects on fitness early versus late in life. This is a special case; the broader principles of optimality/trade-offs can be expressed through multiple genes with contrasting effects, for example (Parker and Smith, 1990; Partridge and Barton, 1993). The disposable soma theory (Kirkwood, 1977) is another special case of trade-offs/optimality, wherein the major mechanistic manifestation is through trade-offs in resource allocation. The hyperfunction theory (Blagosklonny, 2012; Maklakov and Chapman, 2019) classically posits that processes that start earlier in life continue with, or set the organism on a trajectory to, aging further down the road. In this type of trade-off, excessive late function is a price paid for appropriate early development, and alternative trajectories would show slower aging with lower early function. Slightly more broadly, we consider the hyperfunction theory a special case of a general principle: biological processes over the course of an organism’s lifespan are generally hard to time precisely, particularly after development, and thus result more from trajectories than from precise temporal optimization (Cohen, 2004; Kirkwood and Melov, 2011; Wensink, 2013), much as artillery gunners can adjust the direction and angle of a cannon, but lack control over the cannonball after it has been fired.

Antagonistic pleiotropy as depicted in Figure 1 largely but not completely covers both the disposable soma and hyperfunction theories. The lack of complete coverage acknowledges the potential for non-genetic mechanisms, or for mechanisms that are related to genetics in substantially more complex ways than typically considered under antagonistic pleiotropy (effects that are high-dimensionally epistatic as well as contingent on environment). The adaptive hitchhike hypothesis posits that slow aging is a byproduct of other adaptations (Omotoso et al., 2021), and thus is also consistent with optimality approaches. All of these theories, as well as our Danaid theory and adaptive theories, can then be related to purely mechanistic theories of aging, such as those contained in the Hallmarks framework (López-Otín et al., 2013). For example, it has been proposed that the apparently programmed nature of cellular senescence supports adaptive explanations for aging (Milewski, 2010). While we disagree with this contention, the nature of the mechanisms of aging can inform our evaluation of the various evolutionary theories.



[Preliminaries - Proximate Versus Ultimate Theories of Aging?]
Descriptions of the mechanisms of aging are usually considered proximate explanations, as opposed to ultimate evolutionary explanations (Gems and Partridge, 2013). An evolutionary explanation would give the “what” and “why”; the mechanisms would provide the details of the “how”. However, evolutionary models of aging consistently show that essentially any outcome can occur depending on the proximate mechanisms that constrain the range of possible evolutionary outcomes (Baudisch, 2008; Wensink et al., 2014a; Wensink et al., 2014b): depending on constraints, evolution can produce senescence, no senescence, or negative senescence, as well as variation within these categories. While studying mechanisms without evolution indeed means studying proximate but not ultimate explanations of aging, the reverse is not true: studying evolution without mechanisms does not yield an ultimate explanation, but rather no explanation at all. Although “nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution” (Dobzhansky, 1973), nothing in evolution makes sense without the mechanisms. An ultimate theory of aging, if it exists, is found at the intersection of evolutionary and mechanistic forces. Any convincing evolutionary theory of aging must incorporate not only what is known about comparative demography and natural selection, but also what is known about mechanisms and their distribution across taxa.

Most scientists appear to agree with the above, and see existing evolutionary theories of aging as “solving the paradox”: how could aging evolve given its apparently detrimental effect on fitness? The classical theories of aging do provide a plausible solution to the paradox. Yet as soon as we want to do more than solving the paradox, the mechanisms start to matter.

Even those who attempted to just solve the paradox seemed to feel that mechanisms mattered. Hamilton (Hamilton, 1966) sought to explain senescence through calculating the effect on Darwinian fitness of a change in mortality or fecundity at an isolated age. From the decline in the magnitudes of these sensitivities with age Hamilton inferred that senescence is inevitable. Yet he also gave a mechanistic justification:

There is no description of how this would work mechanistically, just “a gene”. While we appreciate that Hamilton merely wished to justify the presentation of a set of mathematical results, later developments force us to take a broader perspective (Kirkwood, 1977; Noble, 2013; Wensink, 2013; Noble et al., 2014), focusing on the way an organism is built and how it functions, which depends on more than DNA alone. No gene gives immunity for one specific year of life.

The disposable soma theory, taking a thermodynamics perspective, comes closer to actual mechanisms. Still, nowadays its pure focus on trade-offs, in particular resource trade-offs, seems too narrow in scope (Cohen et al., 2019), in particular given that the co-existence of multiple trade-offs can change the outcome expected under individual trade-offs (Cohen et al., 2017), further discussed in subsection Allocation Theory.

In short, develomental biology and the role of DNA, for example, are seen in a much different light now compared to several decades ago. In this paper we continue the search for a theory of the evolution of aging more firmly rooted in the mechanisms of organismal physiology, informed where possible by accepted principles from other disciplines, e.g. physics and chemistry, in the tradition of D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s On Growth and Form (Thompson, 2014). In particular, we suggest that multiple complex constraints evolve for reasons largely unrelated to lifespan, but nonetheless shape the relative “maintainability” of various taxa, and thereby their lifespans (Table 1).



[Preliminaries - What Is Aging?]
Despite our clear intuition for what aging is, there are major disagreements among researchers as to its nature and definition (Cohen et al., 2020a), and there are important arguments against the idea of aging as a unified biological phenomenon (Cohen et al., 2020b). A demographic definition such as “monotonic increases in age-specific mortality” includes cases where the mechanisms behind the demographic patterns have little to do with traditional concepts of aging biology. For example, fish and tree mortality are size dependent, a phenomenon largely unrelated to traditional aging mechanisms like declines in tissue function. Additionally, it is hard to know from demographic data what mechanistic aging might look like were we able to keep enough individuals alive longer in a protected environment. A more mechanistic definition, such as “age-related declines in organismal function due to the hallmarks of aging” [with the hallmarks described as in (López-Otín et al., 2013)], runs the risk of missing mechanisms that have yet to be discovered, or that play a role in other taxa, since the hallmarks were tailored to mammals. Indeed, there is every reason to expect a diversity of aging mechanisms across taxa, across individuals, and across environments (Cohen, 2018), presumably following a power-law distribution (Figure 2). An evolutionary definition such as “declines in age-specific fitness” might seem appropriate in this context, but poses the challenge of being hard to measure in many contexts, and hard to relate to mechanisms. We here focus on aging as a progressive and intrinsic decline in physiological function, i.e. an organism’s ability to maintain homeostasis and respond to its environment. We nonetheless integrate information from different sources, including demographic, and do our best to acknowledge that these shifting data types may not always reflect the same underlying phenomenon of aging (Cohen et al., 2020b).

A popular idea is that aging is caused by the accumulation of somatic damage with age (Kirkwood and Austad, 2000; López-Otín et al., 2013). While appealing, this notion requires a clear definition of damage, which is problematic. López-Otín et al. (López-Otín et al., 2013) list nine “hallmarks of aging”: genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered intercellular communication. Hallmarks like epigenetic alterations and telomere attrition consist of clear, spatial aberrations we would associate with the traditional meaning of damage. But other hallmarks, such as altered intercellular communication, deregulated nutrient sensing and mitochondrial dysfunction, have a less clear-cut spatial representation. What if a perfectly undamaged protein is in the wrong place? What if nutrient sensing is disturbed due to the expression of the wrong gene? If all aberrations such as these are classified as damage, then everything deleterious is damage and the definition becomes tautological.

Because many theories of aging do refer to damage accumulation in some way—for example, energy investment to damage repair in the disposable soma theory (Kirkwood, 1977; Kirkwood and Austad, 2000)—a definition of damage is important. The statement “aging is caused by cumulative damage” is meaningful only when adhering to a limited, three-dimensional definition of damage, which allows for alternative and/or complementary hypotheses. Malfunction may or may not have its origin in three-dimensional damage, and there is some evidence that the accumulation of damage with age may be correlation without causation (Doonan et al., 2008; Gems and Doonan, 2009). Alternatives include hyperfunction, such as unchecked growth through hormonal pathways (Blagosklonny, 2009; Blagosklonny, 2012), or other malfunctioning that does not reduce to damage in its traditional sense. For these reasons, we define damage here as a structural, physical, three-dimensional change: This definition would include DNA mutations, protein misfolding, wing damage, and tooth wear, but would exclude more general information loss, depletion of reserves, communication or regulatory errors, etc. There is increasing recognition of non-damage-based mechanisms (Gems and de Magalhães, 2021), and some are described below.



[Preliminaries - The Germ-Soma Distinction and Asymmetric Division]
A long-recognized element in aging theory is the germ-soma distinction (Weismann et al., 1891; Pen and Flatt, 2021). A division of labor exists between the cells of multicellular organisms, such that the germ cells have the task and capability to form future generations, while the somatic cells form the body of one organism, in one generation alone.

A germ-soma distinction would appear a necessary but not a sufficient condition for aging to occur. If all cells aged, life would stop, so a minimum of one cell should be precluded from aging, to serve as the basis for a next generation: the germ cell. The somatic part of the body may age, which is entirely compatible with the continuation of life, but not necessarily.

Indeed, Turke (Turke, 2013) argues that a germ-soma distinction need not be between cells. In unicellular organisms, there can be regions that are insulated from adversities, which serve as the germ regions for next generations, while other regions take a soma role, and are pared away through asymmetrical cell division. The capability of building a perfectly healthy organism should be maintained somewhere, whether or not that be in a separate cell. This manifests particularly in the asymmetric division of some single-celled organisms such as Escherichia coli (Jouvet et al., 2018) and yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) (He et al., 2018).

Contrary to what might be predicted, however, not only do some organisms with germ-soma distinctions show no apparent aging (Congdon et al., 2003; Sauer et al., 2021), but some organisms without the distinction do age, at least demographically (many plants, for example) (Jones et al., 2014), which might be due to factors other than cellular biology and physiology (size, length of time a plant has its roots in the same soil). This remains speculation however; all we can say for the moment is that the germ-soma distinction does not seem to be a decisive predictor of aging at the comparative level, at least based on demographic data.



[Preliminaries - Allocation Theory]
Allocation theory is one popular framework for evolutionary thinking on aging (Kirkwood, 1977; Kirkwood and Austad, 2000; Baudisch, 2008). Like any household, company or country, organisms allocate scarce resources to competing functions, such as growth, somatic maintenance and reproduction. Resources invested in one function cannot be invested in another. There is thus expected to be strong selection to optimize resource allocation and the extent to which maintenance would be required if aging was to be halted (Wensink et al., 2012). Allocation theory has sometimes been framed in the light of a germ-soma distinction, since such a distinction presents the problem of the allocation of resource to germ (reproduction) versus soma (survival) (Kirkwood, 1977; Kirkwood and Holliday, 1979; Kirkwood and Rose, 1991).

There is little doubt that life has trade-offs to solve (Stearns, 1989), yet there are several potential problems in attempting to explain all aging phenomena in this framework. First, if there are other systemic constraints, for instance on damage detection, then it is not directly obvious how these constraints could be framed in terms of an allocation problem. Some might suggest that then resources should be allocated to damage detection, which keeps the argument within the realm of trade-offs. However, the problem cannot be reduced to this level of simplicity (see also Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution and Unmaintainability as an Emergent Property of the Complexity of Life). Failing to detect damage (Hoogstraten et al., 2008) means that no allocation to repair could be made, let alone be optimized.

Second, even if aging did depend on resource allocation, there is a risk of missing the point: what drives the costs and benefits in the allocation model? Suppose that repair is simply impossible through other constraints. This is easily expressed in a resource allocation model: the gain of allocating resources to repair is zero, and the model will predict that no resources are spent on repair. But this is neither surprising nor interesting. What is interesting is the set of constraints driving the model. This principle would apply under a wide range of scenarios in which the constraint on optimal allocation is substantially larger than the range in which the allocation trade-off operates.

Both these points have been realized and subsumed in a broader field of optimality theory (Parker and Smith, 1990; Partridge and Barton, 1993). Scientists versed in optimality theory recognize that there are broader constraints to solve, and are well aware that model assumptions drive model outcomes. Yet we are wary of optimality theory becoming a posthoc justification, where constraints have to be assumed to create a certain model behavior or biological observation, rather than the other way round. Although few scientists would disagree that different model assumptions lead to different outcomes, this recognition is rarely sufficiently incorporated into the use of models. Since different model assumptions lead to different outcomes as diverse as senescence and negative senescence, then what are the predictions of a broader theory?

Furthermore, allocation theory is rooted in (classical) equilibrium thermodynamics: it is typically stated that entropy tends to increase in closed systems, but that organisms are open systems that take resources from their environment to oppose the entropy increase. This is true, but the newer field of non-equilibrium thermodynamics, which is about the organization of complex systems under a gradient (Schneider and Kay, 1994), states that non-equilibrium systems auto-organize so as to resist gradients as well as possible, which means that they reduce the gradient as much as possible at the local level. Within a specific range of gradient, but not outside, complex systems spontaneously assume the organization that best dissipates the gradient (Kondepudi et al., 2015). As energy flows such that gradients dissipate, then how allocable are resources? And how is this allocation achieved? The finding that ∼25% of available energy is dissipated largely unused (Brand, 2000) suggests that the practical problem of keeping biochemical gradients within a certain range may sometimes be more important than finding an appropriate allocation of the available energy. It would be recommendable for the future of allocation theory to investigate the extent to which resources can actually be allocated under specific, targeted physiological control.

Fourth, there is increasing reason to doubt the importance of trade-offs in shaping interspecific evolutionary patterns, particularly in lifespan and aging (Cohen et al., 2019; Maklakov and Chapman, 2019). Trade-offs act not only on a single resource (energy), but on multiple resources simultaneously. When multiple resources trade-off simultaneously, the force of the trade-off tends to weaken and the outcome of selection becomes less predictable (Cohen et al., 2017). This is because the efficiency of different resources for different tasks is expected to vary, opening up optimization possibilities that diminish the force of the trade-off. Also, by arguing that trade-offs have near-universal power to shape life histories, classical theory implicitly or explicitly supposes linear shapes to trade-offs. As an example, the classic van Noordwijk and de Jong paper shows a figure with linear trade-offs, and uses covariances (which are most appropriate for linear relationships) (van Noordwijk and de Jong, 1986). Such linearity may rarely be the case, with the implication that trade-offs may only operate strongly in limited regions of trait space, i.e., where the slope is intermediate and both traits can thus be optimized at a reasonable cost to the other (Bourg et al., 2019). Empirical research also shows that predicted trade-offs do not always manifest under experimental conditions (Rose, 1984).

Trade-off theory seems to predict a canalized set of pathways along which selection can move a species. It need not be perfectly canalized, but in a complex organism where genetic changes can affect multiple phenotypes with high-dimensional pleiotropy and epistasis, coherent evolution without canalization would be unmanageable, and certain regulatory networks suggest this kind of canalization (Csete and Doyle, 2004; Cohen et al., 2012). While such canalized trade-offs appear to exist in some contexts (Dantzer and Swanson, 2012), there are also clear counter-examples. For example, short lifespan has evolved repeatedly in wild killifish not through a limited set of pathways, but apparently from relaxed selection on housekeeping genes leading to a diverse array of fast-aging phenotypes (Cui et al., 2019). That is, under strong selection to develop and reproduce quickly, and with little selection for longevity, short lifespan appears to evolve differently in different lineages, with each one losing a unique set of housekeeping genes due to mutation, i.e., consistent with mutation accumulation rather than trade-offs/optimality (Figure 1). In this case, short lifespan is not due to a cost of reproduction, but a simple failure to maintain selection for maintenance.

Lastly, many trade-offs force higher-level constraints, such as when decreasing one cause of mortality increases another, leading to a constraint on mortality more globally (Pavard et al., 2019). Generally, various potential causes of death exist and, depending on their age patterns, one or the other wins out (Wensink, 2016; Wensink et al., 2017b). Causes of death are themselves the result of interactions between component causes that may be correlated (Wensink et al., 2014c), and statistical modelling suggests these interactions give rise to the typical Gompertz mortality pattern (Levy and Levin, 2014).

While there can be no doubt that trade-offs exist and may sometimes influence life histories, the ensemble of factors discussed imply that resource allocation trade-offs are not by themselves a sufficiently powerful or general explanation for the evolution of aging, and must be integrated with numerous other principles or forces (Cohen et al., 2019; Maklakov and Chapman, 2019).



[Preliminaries - Development, Differentiation, and Totipotency]
A promising mechanistic line of thought in aging—that aging is due to an extension of development, and to constraints arising from developmental processes and cell differentiation (Magalhães, 2012)—may also have relevance for the evolution of aging. Building on the idea of the germ-soma distinction, it has been suggested that the very developmental process in multicellular organisms, during which cells differentiate away from totipotency, is sufficient to explain why aging occurs, as this limits repair (Turke, 2013). This idea is supported by the observation that induced neurons generated directly from human fibroblasts have an ‘old’ epigenetic and metabolic profile, whereas induced neurons from fibroblast-derived induced pluripotent stem cells are “young” (Mertens et al., 2015). Differentiation does seem to matter, and passing through a “pluspotent” (“more potent”) state seems to allow for rejuvenation.

However, this seems more of a mechanistic problem than an evolutionary-conceptual one: there could be mechanisms to keep totipotent cells scattered across an organism which evolution simply has not yet happened on. If there are clear evolutionary benefits to totipotency, then why would an organism not retain a few totipotent cells to be able to form perfectly healthy new tissue? There may well be evolutionary advantages of such a solution, as a full-grown adult has much less to fear than immature offspring.

Another objection is that totipotency is not necessary for repair or replacement. As long as cells capable of forming a kidney are preserved, the kidney can be regenerated. As long as cells capable of forming the heart are preserved, the heart can be regenerated. It is not required that one cell can make both a heart and a kidney. Pluripotency suffices, and again the question is whether such is mechanistically achievable. While we agree with the hunch that complexity and differentiation away from totipotency play some role in aging, we argue below that it is not the loss of totipotent cells that limits the ability to regenerate and repair, but constraints at the higher level of the blueprint of an organism as a whole.



[Preliminaries - The Nature of Evolutionary Explanations]
Evolution by natural selection consists of 1) variation in 2) heritable traits that 3) affect propagation (survival and reproduction). Variation in a trait may be quantitative (e.g. size of a tail) or qualitative (e.g. red versus white tail). When organisms are observed to have some trait A rather than an alternative trait B, there are three potential explanations for this observation. First, variation could have existed but evolved away; some organisms had trait A, while others had trait B, but trait A was better adapted than B, the frequency of trait A increased at a cost to B, and now only trait A can be observed. These are the explanations typically investigated in evolutionary research. Let these be 
Type I
 explanations. The second possibility is that an amount of variation could in principle exist, but it so happens that it has never come about (related to the idea of evolutionary lag (Smith, 1978) but on longer time scales). Since natural selection never acted on trait B, we observe only trait A. Let these be 
Type II
 explanations. Third, variation in a trait could be impossible because of biophysical or biochemical limitations. In this case no alternative to trait A could possibly exist—there is a constraint (Smith, 1978; Gould, 1980). Let these be 
Type III
 explanations. (Plasticity can also be considered a trait in this framework.)

The original evolutionary theories of aging are Type I explanations. They start from a (hypothetical) non-aging phenotype and argue how the aging phenotype could invade (Medawar, 1952; Williams, 1957; Hamilton, 1966; Kirkwood, 1977), as in Kirkwood’s mobbit (Kirkwood, 1999). This implies that human-like complex organisms might evolve without aging if only a limited number of genes were different (mutation accumulation and antagonistic pleiotropy), or if the available energy were allocated differently (the disposable soma theory). One of the main purposes of the present paper is to argue the alternative: there are some complex organisms such as humans for which no variation could possibly exist such that they do not age. This is the evolution of unmaintainability, a Type III explanation.



[Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution]
Genes, biochemistry, and physiology act in a world governed by the laws of physics and chemistry (Thompson, 2014). The product of a gene, whether that be a protein, microRNA, or any other substance, not only has to obey these laws, but also has to fit in the overall cellular metabolism, which may severely restrict DNA action (de Lorenzo, 2014; de Lorenzo, 2015). Likewise, there are no genes that invert gravity. If the laws of physics and chemistry do not change over time, which seems a reasonable assumption, then they are the same for parent and offspring. If these laws leave their traces in organismal physiology, then not all similarities between parent and offspring are heritable. It is such constraints that give rise to Type III evolutionary explanations.

Beyond the constraints of chemistry and physics, there exists a series of more specific biological constraints, most notably phylogenetic inertia, interoperability, and developmental constraints.



[Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution - Phylogenetic Inertia]
Genomes do not evolve de novo, but rather through small modifications to existing genomes. Adaptation must happen through continuous change in which all intermediate forms are viable in their current environment. Accordingly, the history of a lineage as reflected in its genome may impose major constraints on the phenotypic space that is accessible through natural selection (Blomberg and Garland, 2002). For example, no mammals have the remarkable regenerative capacities that starfish do. This likely reflects a moment in the history of the mammalian lineage at which the flexibility to evolve regeneration was sacrificed for other properties of development; while it might be theoretically possible to imagine a series of genetic changes that would restore extreme regeneration, this will not happen in nature.



[Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution - Interoperability]
An organism is finely tuned, integrating countless molecules affecting numerous systems that together coordinate homeostasis at levels ranging from sub-cellular to organismal. By necessity, these systems interact, meaning that changes to one system can affect others. This presents a major constraint on the ability to optimize components piecemeal. For example, the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 plays important roles in acute inflammatory response to an infection (Helfgott et al., 1989), in the senescence-associated secretory phenotype of senescent cells (Laberge et al., 2012), and in the chronic low-grade inflammation (“inflamm-aging”) that plays a role in many chronic diseases (Cohen et al., 2018). Its implication in pathways is different in each of these roles, and so any mutation that affected one role would also be under selection for its impacts on the other roles. Interoperability manifests itself hierarchically (cells need to interoperate with tissues and molecules, for example), across similar levels of organization (for example between organs), and environmentally (organisms need phenotypes that function under different conditions). Accordingly, the interoperability constraint affects nearly everything, often in ways that are very specific to a given species’ biology and ecology.



[Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution - Developmental Constraints]
Adult phenotypes must be arrived at through a series of steps during development. Only phenotypes that can be arrived at by tweaking the developmental process are feasible. Phylogenetic inertia and interoperability constraints pertain also to the process of development, linking these constraints.

These three types of constraints can be quite forbidding, so much so that they might appear to give rise to Type III evolutionary explanations. They do however test the difference between Type II and Type III explanations, as we could imagine that in a much different evolutionary history, constraints could have been different. In any defined physiological and genetic setting however, these are hard, Type III constraints. For example, arthropod size is constrained by the ability to deliver oxygen to tissues as surface area-to-volume ratio decreases; this constraint was circumvented in tetrapods by the evolution of the lung. But within any given arthropod species, the size constraint can be considered Type III for all practical purposes.

When do systemic constraints arise? The design and construction of a complex organism versus products designed by humans are fundamentally distinct. In the latter case, there is a blueprint to which the engineer can refer at any moment, and the detailed instructions which the engineer tries to follow as closely as possible. In the former case, the information consists in procedural instructions without reference to a greater scheme of things: “There is (…) information in a fertilized egg (in genes, in molecular structures, and in spatial variations in the concentrations of particular chemicals), but this has no simple relationship with how the final built body will look. (Rather) the information has the effect of controlling the sequence of events that will follow.” (Davies, 2014).

The cues that lead to developmental phenomena are provided by developing tissue, against the background of the environment the embryo finds itself in: for mammals the mother’s womb. This means that repair capacity, at least in as much as it relies on re-making components, critically depends on the presence of conditions that may no longer exist in an adult organism. Informational cues, physical space, and accommodating complexities that were instrumental in the formation of a tissue may no longer be present in an adult organism. It is not without reason that the switching on and off of genes during development is so carefully timed: the moment these genes are active may be the only moment that expression has the desired effect (Davies, 2014).

Just being an adult changes things, too. Take the formation of the brain. A newborn human hardly relies on its higher brain functions for survival. Higher brain functions develop because brain cells are created in overabundance and make connections in overabundance. Nature then tests these connections and confirms or discards them during synaptic pruning. Those connections (and cells) that are useful are retained and reinforced, while the other connections are removed (Davies, 2014). In an adult organism, the circuits formed during pruning have become vital for its survival and cannot be repaired by repeating the same procedure; the organism would be helpless prey. For these and other reasons, the result of development is an organism with a physiology that restricts repair. Complex organisms such as humans have laid layer upon layer of complexity, inhibiting repair and leading to the loss of simple regenerative capacity of tissues.



[Unmaintainability as an Emergent Property of the Complexity of Life]
Even if we remain, for the moment, within the realm of aging caused by insufficient repair of damage in the classical, three-dimensional sense, after development repair may be severely limited by the wholesale physiological organization of an organism, due not only to the already mentioned constraints on resources, but also to the following.

Information. Any repair process requires guidance as to the desired state of the organism (Kirkwood, 1981). If repair amounts to replacement of a damaged molecule, then it is clear where that information could come from: new molecules are synthesized using the pathway involved in regular synthesis, while old ones are discarded. But it is not always that straightforward. In insects, the mother copies spatial information about her own body into the eggs as gradients in concentrations of molecules [(Davies, 2014), notice the non-DNA inheritance]. The Bauplan of the offspring is derived from these gradients. If the body of a mature insect is sufficiently damaged, the information on the desired state is irretrievable: repair is limited.

Diminishing Marginal Returns. If a dirty floor is swept, the first pass with the broom will get up most but not all of the dirt; the second pass will get most of what is remaining, but much less than the first pass, and so forth. At a certain point, one decides to stop sweeping because the amount of additional dirt swept up is not worth the effort. This principle of diminishing marginal returns applies equally well to many repair and maintenance processes. For example, the energetic costs of repair become relatively higher the rarer damage types are (requiring more brooms and more sweeps), and thus the greater the investment required (Gems and McElwee, 2005). Diminishing marginal returns can also interact with other constraints, such as damage detection below.

Damage Detection. In addition to “knowing” the desired state, the repair machinery should also be able to detect a deviation from the desired state. (We are grateful to Diana van Heemst for pointing this out.) This could be by comparison to a blueprint, the sensing of a disturbed function, or through the local release of cytokines. Often the detection mechanism will only indicate that damage exists, without conveying its exact nature, limiting repair.

A Compatible Physical and Chemical Environment. A repair process needs to access the site of injury and to operate there, which may be limited by the function of the tissue to be repaired. Humans have to counter gravity and other forces, and structures that handle those forces (bones, tendons, actin filaments) cannot be (re)moved, or can be (re)moved only to a very limited extent. Similarly, repair machinery that deals with arterial damage should be able to operate in the sheer stress caused by the blood flow. Likewise, any repair machinery may need a specific chemical environment that interferes with the normal functioning of the damaged tissue. Repair in an artery takes place in an overall environment with a pH of 7.41; altering this pH would interfere with the blood’s function of carrying oxygen, as oxygen dissociates from hemoglobin in an acidic environment (Bern et al., 2004). Furthermore, sending a cell into apoptosis and the communication of the apoptotic cell with its surroundings may interfere with normal cellular communications (Suzanne and Steller, 2013).

The evolution of the repair process. Even if a repair process could exist uninhibited by the constraints above, how would it come about?

Evolution works with the variation available as Gould proposed with the concept of exaptation (Gould and Vrba, 1982), and as Jacob expressed in his concept of “evolutionary tinkering” (Jacob, 1977). An example of tinkering is found in the brain, which consists of neurons that shape the electric connectivity of the brain, and supporting cells that insulate and feed the neurons, or have an immune function. Microglia are the supporting cells that perform the immune function, but their role encompasses much more than immunity (Marin and Kipnis, 2013). They secrete tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) into the synapse, where neurons communicate, which affects neuronal potentiation (Jebelli et al., 2015) and neuron network stability (Stellwagen and Malenka, 2006). Thus, it seems that a cell whose primary, historical function was immunity uses a molecular substance, TNF-α, whose primary, historical original function was immune regulation, to improve the function of the brain. Microglia (and TNF-α) were present in the brain because of their immune function, but because TNF-α happened to affect neuronal activity, a novel function evolved. This scenario is unconfirmed but arguably more likely than the emergence, through pure random variation, of some hypothetical cell type that similarly adjusts neuronal activity (Gladyshev, 2016). A comparable principle likely applies to many repair processes: they may have been adapted from other functions rather than being tailored to a specific type of damage. Accordingly, repair is unlikely to be perfect.

Straightforward exchange of components may be feasible in some organisms, but not others (Schaible et al., 2014), and not all types of repair consist in routine replacement. For instance, the arterial fatty streak or the extra-cellular plaques in Alzheimer’s disease have no physiological function, but are (by-) products that should not be there in the first place. They should be removed rather than replaced, which requires a separate, new repair mechanism, or a complete reconstruction of an entire new organ. It is unclear how this could be achieved mechanistically, and even less clear which evolutionary-historical path could lead to such invention.



[Moving Beyond Damage]
Going beyond the boundaries of damage being the cause of aging complicates matters further still. It is now well understood that life is a complex system in the formal sense: composed of multiple interacting elements with feedback loops, a hierarchical structure, non-linear dynamics, and emergent properties (Kitano, 2002). Emergent properties are properties of a system that are not evident by considering lower-level components individually or additively. For example, blood pressure is an emergent property of the circulatory system that cannot be understood as a simple property of cells in the vasculature. Consideration of an organism as a complex system can have a radical impact on the questions we ask: it is not sufficient to decompose an organism into constituent pieces, without asking how the pieces all interact as an ensemble to generate function.

Joining a complex systems perspective on biology with the above considerations on constraints and unmaintainability, a new hypothesis emerges for how unmaintainability (and thus aging) could evolve. A key property of many complex systems is robustness (Kitano, 2007; Kriete, 2013), defined here as the capacity to maintain stability of key aspects of a system in the face of perturbations and challenges, and thus an approximate converse to fragility. This is particularly crucial for biological systems, which, in order to survive and reproduce, must maintain dynamic equilibrium in the face of ever-changing conditions. Low robustness is not necessarily concomitant with unmaintainability or aging—for example, a lack of robustness to a heat shock or to starvation could result in abrupt death, regardless of age. Nonetheless, most biological networks are highly redundant and buffered (Nijhout et al., 2017), explaining why so few genes are lethal when knocked out, and may not even produce noticeable effects under normal conditions. In this context, when the tolerance of the system is exceeded (i.e., insufficient robustness), the consequence is likely not death, but an adverse change to network state. This can manifest either as a shift to an alternative state that is less functional or less robust itself, or as a cascading series of failures that are not immediately fatal but set the organism on a downward spiral. For example, the vertebrate corticosteroid-based stress response creates a cascade of changes (blood pressure, kidney function, etc.) that are generally adaptive short-term, but when the tolerance of the system is exceeded by a chronic stress, these same changes impact many known aging mechanisms (telomeres, inflammation, oxidative stress, etc.) (McEwen, 1998; Zalli et al., 2014; Mocayar Marón et al., 2019; Sterling, 2020).

Theoretical work on robustness in complex systems, particularly in highly optimized tolerance systems such as living organisms, has shown that robustness is usually achieved with certain trade-offs: robustness to one type of perturbation may come at the cost of increased susceptibility to another, or may be achieved with increased resource investment, or a decrease in functionality, etc. (Zhou et al., 2005; Kriete, 2013). As evolution explores the space of robust potential phenotypes, constraints such as those outlined above pose further limits on the portions of phenotypic space that are accessible, and thus impose additional limits on maintainability. The robustness of the regulatory networks that maintain dynamic equilibrium within organisms over time is thus expected to be imperfect (Cohen, 2016). When a sufficient number of vulnerabilities exist in the system, it becomes unmaintainable, and aging results.

On the surface, this explanation may seem to agree with classic resource allocation and trade-off theory (and indeed it is complementary), but there are several important distinctions. First, classical trade-off theory would seem to imply that, with sufficient resource investment, or with different genes, aging might be avoided altogether. This is not predicted here: the nature of robustness is to be imperfect, and resource allocation is only sometimes expected to be the important factor with which robustness trades off. Infinite resources would not likely stave off aging much under this hypothesis, nor would a different set of genes. A thought experiment illustrates this. Imagine Earth is colonized by a dominant alien species that attempts to breed humans to become immortal. Only lineages stemming from the longest-lived individuals are allowed to persist, thereby weakening the selection shadow on the current human lifescale and largely counteracting mutation accumulation. Classical theory posits no force limiting evolution toward immortality, whereas the Danaid theory predicts that human lifespan would evolve asymptotically toward a limit defined by unmaintainability and systemic constraints: with the existing physiological Bauplan, aging is not avoidable.

Second, aging need not depend on any specific mechanism or pathway, or even any clearly demarcated set of pathways. It is the system that is robust (or not), the system that dysregulates (or not). Aging could emerge even in the absence of clear-cut mechanisms (though mechanisms are not precluded). Third, classical trade-off theory predicts a single fast-slow continuum of life histories across the tree of life, which is clearly not observed. A complex systems perspective on robustness implies that the specific physiology of each taxon will determine the landscape and strength of the trade-offs involved. Hence, some taxa [e.g. mammals (Gaillard et al., 2016)] would display universal aging, a fast-slow continuum, and clear trade-offs, whereas others might show very different patterns, ranging from apparent lack of aging (e.g., some sharks, some turtles) to taxonomically fine-scale variation in the presence of aging and the strength of trade-offs (e.g. ray-finned fish).

The theory we propose portrays aging as an arc or trajectory. Similar trajectories are known in development/morphogenesis (Davies, 2014), and are increasingly recognized in the immune system (Franceschi et al., 2017; Fulop et al., 2017) and in neurobiological and cognitive trajectories (Suzanne and Steller, 2013). We propose that such arcs are present in a wide array of aspects of organismal biology and physiology. Homeostatic networks may change with age (Dansereau et al., 2019), as may the functions of various organs, not because they are degrading or failing but because the changes are the natural consequence of the arc of that system, and of its integration with all the other systems following their arcs. The idea that all aspects of aging are deleterious may reflect a cultural bias (Cohen et al., 2020c), and many aspects may indeed be adaptive (Le Couteur and Simpson, 2011). For example, mammalian sarcopenia is widely seen as a major aging-related pathology, but it can also be conceived of as a mechanism to reduce energy requirements, and thus potentially adaptive in the broader context of the arc of the organism, despite its adverse consequences on muscle function. The Bauplan of an organism is the unit on which the arc takes its course, and unmaintainability is an emergent property of the multiple trajectories evolving concomitantly within that Bauplan; this may explain why aging is so different in organisms without a fixed Bauplan.

We thus argue that the aging process can be linked to the complexity of life: that it can be an emergent property of life, with unmaintainability generated by the numerous competing demands on the organism and/or its regulatory complexity across the arc of development and adulthood. This does not mean that all complex organisms will necessarily age, nor that all systemic constraints require complexity, but rather that complexity can in some cases be a driving force for aging at the interface of evolutionary and mechanistic levels. Additonally, complexity is not the only potential reason aging evolves, nor the only potential mechanism: clearly some simpler forms of life (e.g. yeast, Caenhorabditis elegans) do age, whereas some more complex forms (e.g. some vertebrates) do not. It is time to move beyond the attempt for silver-bullet explanations of aging. Multiple forces interact, with different strengths in different taxa, to generate patterns of aging.

At first glance, it might appear that the Danaid theory (Table 1) is simply a special case of the declining force of selection. At some point, organisms evolved greater complexity or other traits that made them less maintainable/more susceptible to aging; natural selection nevertheless favored these more-aging-susceptible variants, making it appear that the declining force of selection must always be upstream. However, this ignores two key points. First, it is not necessarily the case that complexity will shorten lifespan. It is fully possible that aspects of complexity could evolve and become fixed in a lineage under conditions where they have no impact on lifespan, or even improve lifespan (Wensink et al., 2014b), and that any lifespan-limiting impacts could become apparent only in daughter lineages with specific environmental or physiological conditions. The evolutionary origins of the complexity/unmaintainabilty are thus not crucial to consider. Second, as noted, we are not solely concerned with explaining why aging first evolved, but also why it differs as it does across taxa. Regardless of how complexity and unmaintainability were originally selected for, we argue that once present they have continuing impacts on how aging evolves subsequently (including the way it may disappear or arise anew in a lineage), and are thus germane to an evolutionary theory of aging but distinct from the declining force of selection. For example, it would appear that some organisms of moderate to high complexity do not age, at least within observable/relevant timescales (minimally hydra, but likely many vertebrates too (Congdon et al., 2003; Jones et al., 2014; Sauer et al., 2021)). How might that complexity affect the subsequent evolution of aging and lifespan in their descendant lineages?



[The Comparative Biology and Evolution of Unmaintainability]
Classical theories rely on the selection shadow to explain aging. With some latitude for how the different sub-theories might interact, the prediction is thus that selection shadow should correlate tightly with aging rate. While this may indeed be the case within certain clades (mammals or mammalian orders, for example), it is almost certainly not the case across wider swaths of taxa.

Information on the comparative biology of aging comes from two types of sources: demographic data across a broad array of species (Jones et al., 2014; Salguero‐Gómez et al., 2014; Salguero-Gómez et al., 2016; Scheuerlein et al., 2017), and experimental/lab work on mechanisms in diverse species. The former has the advantage of covering many more species and more branches of the tree of life, but the disadvantage of an inability to disentangle physiological aging mechanisms from other mechanisms that cause aging-like signatures in demography. Negative senescence due to factors such as size might partially cancel out mortality increases or fecundity decreases due to physiological aging, but, if aging is inexorable and leads to inevitable death, at some point the physiological aging should become demographically apparent if observation time suffices.

The picture painted by demographic studies is as follows: Aging appears to be present in all birds and all mammals. Potential exceptions such as naked mole-rats (Ruby et al., 2018) may not have been followed long enough; we remain agnostic. There are some taxa that appear not to age, or where lack of aging is widespread, such as sharks, crocodilians, and turtles (Finch, 1994; Jones et al., 2014). In many taxa, aging is more of a patchwork: in ray-finned fishes and plants, there are clear examples of species that appear not to age, and clear examples of species that age very quickly, often without a clear taxonomic pattern, though data are not yet complete enough to thoroughly evaluate phylogenetic signal. There are many examples of unusual aging patterns or lack of aging in invertebrates and plants with clonal reproduction (Shefferson et al., 2017); mechanistic studies generally do not contradict these findings, and provide better resolution for the physiology. Note, for example, that plants can handle polyploidy and aneuploidy, and even use it to their advantage (Tudge, 2006), while mammals cannot. Within mammals, exceptional lifespans of naked mole-rats, blind mole-rats, and bowhead whales appear related to specific adaptations, unique in each species, to avoid certain aging mechanisms (Gorbunova et al., 2012; Takasugi et al., 2020; Cooper and Gorbunova, 2021). It is unclear whether the adaptations discovered represent ways to constrain the most-limiting aging mechanisms in each species, or are a small subset of a large number of adaptations to limit a large number of mechanisms. Current evidence suggests, but does not definitively prove, that these adaptations can succeed in slowing but not stopping aging in mammals. Broadly, for both mammals and birds, correlations between lifespan and body size/metabolic rate/reproductive rate do suggest some role for trade-offs in structuring lifespan, though the associations are weak enough for other factors to play important roles.

Indeed, there appear to be a variety of factors that explain unusual aging patterns in different species, rather than a single unifying explanation. The exceptional lifespan of the ocean quahog, Arctica islandica, (record: 507 years) seems to be the extreme of a continuum. Various clam species with different lifespans differ continuously in their ability to avoid protein aggregation and loss of proteostasis (Ridgway et al., 2011; Ungvari et al., 2011; Treaster et al., 2015). The lack of aging in hydra appears to be dependent on both species and environment (Martínez, 1998; Martínez and Bridge, 2012). In killifish, as noted above, short lifespan appears to evolve repeatedly but through different mechanisms: breakdown in housekeeping genes across the genome as selection relaxes on the ability to maintain physiology for more than several months (Cui et al., 2019). In taxa such as lepidoptera and bees, wear-and-tear on wings may be a major factor limiting lifespan (Rueppell, 2009), and is probably not closely related to the conserved genetic pathways that appear limiting in yeast, fruit flies, nematodes, and mammals.

This portrait of comparative aging suggests that there is no single explanation that will concisely summarize everything. There are conserved genetic pathways, and these do modulate aging in some species, but not all. In some taxa, trade-offs have a large role, in others a weaker role. There are few if any universal mechanisms, but in at least some species controlling the key known mechanisms is part of the reason they can evolve exceptional lifespans. Some constraints, while by definition inevitable, may nonetheless be modulated. For example, it is likely impossible to eliminate DNA damage completely, but it can be drastically reduced with appropriate investments in protection and repair. (By contrast, cellular senescence is a programmed pathway, and could presumably be eliminated completely by one or several key mutations. Cellular senescence is thus best thought of as an adaptation, for example to reduce cancer risk and for pruning in brain development.) Both adaptations and modulable constraints may be subject to trade-offs.

In this context, we argue that unmaintainability is the missing piece of the puzzle that allows us to make at least a little sense of this patchwork—for example, why mammals show a slow-fast life history continuum (Gaillard et al., 2016), but sharks do not. For any given taxon, the fundamental question it faces in the evolution of lifespan is, what are the constraints, i.e., what factors will limit lifespan regardless of selection and physiological adaptation? The answer to this question will be fundamentally different for a hydra, a butterfly, a fruit fly, a pine tree, a shark, and a mammal.

Above, we have given examples of the types of constraints that may apply, both generally and in regards to aging. One that deserves particular attention is the type of constraint arising from the structure of the homeostatic networks specific to each taxon. For example, in mammals, high levels of glucose are toxic and generate advanced glycosylation end products, which appear to contribute to aging; in birds, similar glucose levels are tolerated, and indeed necessary to sustain the metabolism associated with flight (Holmes et al., 2001). Thus, despite numerous similarities between bird and mammalian metabolic networks, there are also fundamental differences that generate regulatory weak points for each taxon. Metabolic syndrome and inflamm-aging, for example, appear to be mammalian phenomena. In other words, the regulatory networks that have evolved in each taxon have unique strengths and weaknesses; in some cases, these weaknesses will create ways the system is unmaintainable, and thus represent constraints on the evolution of lifespan.

Accordingly, the model we propose is that each taxon has a unique set of unmodulable constraints, modulable constraints, and adaptations that may affect aging. The constraints may often be related to the structure of regulatory networks and how this interacts with the taxon’s ecology/niche (e.g., the need of a bird to migrate, insectivorous diet, etc.). Within the broad framework set by the constraints, trade-offs and drift/stochasticity then operate to produce the specific aging patterns of each species. Note that we discuss taxon-specific constraints rather than species-specific constraints because in some cases the relevant variation is mostly at higher levels. For example, it would appear that there is relatively little variation in the constraints within mammals, or within birds (the basic physiological and biochemical architecture being relatively similar). In contrast, the constraints may be different from one hydra species to another, though it is hard to say for certain (Martínez and Bridge, 2012).

The constraints arising in a given taxon may have their origins in relatively random factors early in the taxon’s evolution, which have subsequently become fixed. For example, early mammals had a much more limited set of ecological niches for a long time and were presumably relatively short-lived; it would be unsurprising that their physiological architecture evolved containing constraints that imposed important limits on the subsequent evolution of lifespan as the taxon diversified. Differences in constraints across taxa create a patchwork of how unmaintainable each taxon is. Within this broader framework, trade-offs and other forces can operate to adjust aging. In some sense, this is a rather unsatisfying answer and explanation: the explicit prediction is that local, hard-to-predict and hard-to-identify factors are responsible for the diversity of aging patterns across the tree of life, and thus there is no broad theory that will explain the evolution of aging more generally. On the other hand, ours is a coherent explanation for why a simpler theory should probably never have been expected to be sufficient, and is consistent with the vast bulk of what is known about aging at many levels: genetic, molecular, physiological, demographic, and evolutionary.



[Summary and the Next Steps]
In Greek mythology, the Danaids were the 50 daughters of Danaus. They were supposed to marry the 50 sons of Aegyptus, but all but one of them killed their husbands on their wedding night. For this, they were condemned to spend eternity carrying water in a perforated vessel or sieve, and became a metaphor for futility. We call our theory the “Danaid theory of aging” because we propose that organismal biology and physiology are like the leaky vessels of the Danaids, unable to hold life in them eternally due to constraints in their basic structure. This metaphor creates a clear contrast with programmed theories of aging (which would imply that the Danaids would pour water out of the vessels intentionally for some reason), and with classical evolutionary theories relying on trade-offs and selection pressure (which might imply that the Danaids simply did not pay enough attention to avoid sloshing and spilling the water, or that they chose to accept some spillage because they wanted to run while carrying the water and accepted the consequences). We also add a nuance to the metaphor: some vessels (organismal physiologies) are leakier than others (and a few might even be completely unperforated), making them quite variable in their ability to hold water (life).

In summary, the Danaid theory of aging proposes that, in many taxa, aging is an inevitable consequence of how life has been constructed in that taxon, for reasons (constraints) largely independent of selection on aging and lifespan. Aging and lifespan are then further modified within each taxon by optimization and mutation accumulation as predicted based on the declining force of selection with age. The underlying constraints are expected to vary across taxa in ways that may appear arbitrary, reflecting developmental and regulatory requirements as well as the vagaries of chance across the ancestral lineage.



[Summary and the Next Steps - A famous quotation goes]
Often still seen as the core question that an evolutionary theory of aging should seek to answer, this misses the point. Why would maintenance be “much simpler” and “mere”? Cues present during morphogenesis may no longer be there. Development may have closed repair options. And complex regulatory networks may simply slide out of equilibrium through repetitive perturbations, without a clear way of putting them back. Hence, the quote might just as well read:

But even more, we noted in Section Systemic Constraints on Physiology and Evolution that evolution can only pick up options that it stumbles across (Jacob, 1977). The process of morphogenesis already exists in any organism for historical reasons (Turke, 2013): Whether organisms age or not, they die. Hence, whether or not chronologically old organisms are also biologically old, the necessity to reproduce exists. It is not at all impossible, therefore, that in the light of the restrictions on repair discussed here, nature patches for the short term, while in the long term it applies one all-encompassing repair mechanism: the creation of a new organism. Hence, an even more apt variation on the quote above could read:

We are not the first to mention the role of constraints in shaping the evolution of aging. The hyperfunction theory does so more specifically (Blagosklonny, 2012; Gems and de la Guardia, 2013), and trade-offs themselves are a form of constraint (Cohen et al., 2019). However, we feel that the broad picture that persists in the literature is that constraints are an afterthought, a detail that can be ignored, or worse: invoked whenever standard explanations fail. We argue that thinking carefully about what constraints are present can fundamentally alter how we understand the evolution of the aging process, and that such efforts have rarely been undertaken.

As we have emphasized, the exact mechanisms of aging, and hence its evolution, are expected to vary greatly from taxon to taxon, which complicates the task of making predictions. But across the tree of life, reproduction remains the ultimate repair. Some organisms also seem capable of keeping their own body in perfect shape, while others do not. In finding a new theory of the evolution of aging the central question thus becomes:

To answer that question, we need to map the diversity of mechanisms and pathways across the tree of life. Such efforts are beginning, including in this Research Topic, but the task is daunting because of the variety of potential mechanisms and the large number that may be highly specific. Efforts to study mechanisms in unusual species (ocean quahogs (Ungvari et al., 2011), naked mole-rats (Tian et al., 2013), etc.) have already proven highly fruitful; the next challenge is to identify unusual mechanisms and quantify their importance. This could lead to eventual empirical tests of this theory, and to further theory building. If unusual or non-canonical aging mechanisms are rarely if ever important for a species’ demography, they may be negligible, in contradiction to our theory. If the Hallmarks of aging are shown to be not just present in most/all species, but sufficient explanations, and modulable, our theory would be disproven. Conversely, our theory will be supported if increasing data show variation in aging mechanisms/constraints in different taxa (Omotoso et al., 2021), often at variance with the forces of selection, and if we continue to uncover a larger and larger role for the breakdown in homeostatic mechanisms or other basic constraints in shaping the aging process. It is time for theory on the evolution of aging to incorporate what is known about development, physiology, genetics, and comparative biology, and to acknowledge explicitly that constraints could result in aging even in the absence of the selection shadow, and thus even in the absence of the classical theories.



KEYWORDS: aging, constraint, development, evolution, maintenance, senescence, theory

AUTHORS: Maarten J. Wensink, Alan A. Cohen

YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology

================================================================================
DOI: 10.3390/cells11050917
================================================================================

TITLE: A Mechanistic Theory of Development-Aging Continuity in Humans and Other Mammals

ABSTRACT: There is consensus among biogerontologists that aging occurs either as the result of a purposeful genome-based, evolved program or due to spontaneous, randomly occurring, maladaptive events. Neither concept has yet identified a specific mechanism to explain aging's emergence and acceleration during mid-life and beyond. Presented herein is a novel, unifying mechanism with empirical evidence that describes how aging becomes continuous with development. It assumes that aging emerges from deterioration of a regulatory process that directs morphogenesis and morphostasis. The regulatory system consists of a genome-wide "backbone" within which its specific genes are differentially expressed by the local epigenetic landscapes of cells and tissues within which they reside, thereby explaining its holistic nature. Morphostasis evolved in humans to ensure the nurturing of dependent offspring during the first decade of young adulthood when peak parental vitality prevails in the absence of aging. The strict redundancy of each morphostasis regulatory cycle requires sensitive dependence upon initial conditions to avoid initiating deterministic chaos behavior. However, when natural selection declines as midlife approaches, persistent, progressive, and specific DNA damage and misrepair changes the initial conditions of the regulatory process, thereby compromising morphostasis regulatory redundancy, instigating chaos, initiating senescence, and accelerating aging thereafter.

FULL TEXT:

[1. Definitions]
The terms “morphostasis” and “morpholysis” are used for nomenclatural consistency with “morphogenesis” being the process by which systems change and evolve and “morphosis” being the sequence or manner of somatic development or change. Morphostasis refers to the transient post-morphogenetic period of young adulthood when the soma displays perfect adaptation and structural stability, absent morphosis, and frank aging. In humans, the period of morphostasis occurs during the decade immediately following completion of the last developmental stage. In contrast, “maintenance” refers to the energy expending process that avoids or repairs organismal damage occurring throughout life, but especially during and in opposition to the on-going effects of aging or “morpholysis”, the process of organismal deconstruction. Although often used synonymously with aging, and to describe certain cellular aspects of embryogenesis, “senescence” is defined as the point of transition between morphostasis and morpholysis when aging begins and exponentially progresses.



[2. Introduction]
Aging is generally thought to occur by programmed (adaptive) or non-programmed (non-adaptive/stochastic) processes [1,2]. Adaptive theories presume that aging evolved to benefit species, not individuals [3,4]. They provide reasons why, but not the mechanism by which, aging benefits evolution; however, its progression has often been said to appear programmatic.

Non-adaptive theories view aging as resulting from molecular damages that accumulates because chemical and physical constraints prevent their elimination by evolutionary processes. Stochastic damage can be quantified, and somewhat resisted, but cannot explain the programmatic patterns, sequences and timing of events associated with aging. Non-adaptive aging processes require “indirect” explanations, independent of a well-defined program [2].

The opinion that “impressive diversity” characterizes aging [2] leads to the erroneous assumption that its cause resides within the senescent phenotype. It does not!

Each of the aging theories lack essential elements that are possessed by the other. Adaptive theories lack mechanism, while non-adaptive theories lack programmatic construct. The current theory provides both. Events that promote senescence occur “within the scope of the developmental program”, causing the progression of aging to appear programmatic.

The assumptions of the theory are as follows:(a)A holistic regulatory program guides morphogenesis and morphostasis in the absence of aging;(b)Purifying (stabilizing) natural selection sustains, but also threatens, regulatory program redundancy during morphostasis;(c)Regulatory behavior during morphostasis changes with passage of time from causal determinism to determinative chaos;(d)Progressively chaotic regulatory behavior erodes morphostasis redundancy initiating senescence and accelerating the rate of aging.



[3. Theories Linking Development to Aging]
Central to the theory is the developmental program (DP) which is universally accepted as “a cornerstone of modern biology that … drives all biological processes … from conception to reproductive maturation” [1]. This opinion leaves the question of what regulates the dynamic processes of living during young adulthood and beyond unanswered.

The notion that development is mechanistically linked to senescence has often been rejected in favor of separate aging programs [5,6,7].

A possible reason for this opinion is the mistaken impression that the DP has no purpose when somatic construction is complete. However, in humans, for example, morphogenesis ends with the emergence of an adult phenotype at about 20 years of age. Natural selection (NS) is still operable for about another decade, sustaining regulatory influence of the DP over the young adult soma to ensure maintenance of appropriate cellular ultrastructure and function as well as to complete its evolutionary obligation of successful reproduction. Other molecules that participate in development, e.g., morphogens/morphostats, also act in adulthood to maintain normal microarchitecture and to repair damaged tissues [8], while expression of developmental genes in adults suggest that the DP is operational throughout life [9].

Based upon this premise, several authors have offered theories linking aging directly to the DP [10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17].

While varying in specific details, all aforementioned theories assume that expression of the DP in some form continues beyond morphogenesis to cause or participate in aging. However, they are flawed because they assume that its continued expression into adulthood is maladaptive. If so, then its persistence into adulthood should have been selected against because the DP presumably ends in young organisms when NS is still operable. The lack of such post-developmental negative selection suggests that continuation of the DP during adulthood has evolutionary benefit, at least initially.



[4. Is the DP an Aging Program?]
Singer [18] proposed that aging is a “plastic” DP, encoded in the zygote, genome, and epigenome, whose expression begins at conception rather than after attainment of reproductive maturity. Presumably, variation in aging characteristics among individuals of the same species results from environmentally induced epigenetic changes, thus accounting for programmatic “plasticity”. He further proposed that interspecific differences in aging result from the expression of unique, evolved species-specific developmental programs, each with their own characteristic pattern [18,19]. Singer’s theory avoids the difficulties of explaining the evolution of maladaptive aging programs by making aging part of the universally accepted DP. Thus, he explains that aging emerges from the DP due to diminished strength of NS resulting from declining fertility, making it an “integral part of the fabric of life”. However, he does not explain why nor how the DP continues beyond its last developmental stage. This is a significant omission because essential to understanding the origin of aging is knowing how and/or in what form the DP continues after somatic construction is completed.

Instead, Singer proposed that programmatic aging is adaptive because it provides a means to “regulate species population densities within the constraints imposed by the ecosystem organization.” [19]. This concept is similar to Mitteldorf’s demographic theory [20] and may well provide an evolutionary explanation for the benefit of aging in regulating population density. However, it does not identify a discrete aging mechanism or provide convincing evidence that demographic stability was the primary factor for selection of developmental “plasticity”. Singer [21] further claimed that biological processes are not uniquely different in young and old organisms, thereby providing “considerable evidence linking aging to developmental programs”.

In agreement with Singer, the current theory accepts that the mechanism linking development to aging originates at conception but rejects the concept that biological processes specific to organismal aging do not exist. Nonetheless, if species-specific developmental programs have different trajectories, then they may also have related, but dissimilar, mechanistic properties. If true, the exact descriptions of shared aging mechanisms among species would be difficult to achieve. Thus, for interpretive accuracy, the main focus of the current mechanistic theory is upon mammalian aging, especially the human condition.



[5. Development]
Development is defined as “the series of progressive, nonrepetitive changes that occur during the life history of an organism. The essence of this definition contrasts development with metabolism, the essentially repetitive chemical changes necessary for day-to-day functioning of the body” [22].

These definitions raise questions about how the mechanism for senescence begins and organismal aging proceeds from development, including:(a)Does metabolism play any role in aging, i.e., is progressive metabolic insufficiency a cause or consequence of aging?(b)What, in general, are the events regulating the dynamic process of development at each stage of the DP?(c)Are stages of the DP truly nonrepetitive, or do one or more continue to be expressed upon completion of morphogenesis? If so, for what purpose and for how long?



[6. Metabolic Thermodynamics]
Yates described conversion of energy in biological systems at various life stages to provide a homeodynamic overview of how development and aging are related [23].

Upon initiation of development, self-organizing systems produce new forms and functions from internal energy. The complexity of morphogenesis increases with each developmental stage, as internally negentropic transactions reflect the increasing order. However, upon completion of human morphogenesis at approximately 20 years of age, adulthood begins. Thereafter, many of the previously available degrees of freedom that were needed to complete development are unavailable. This restriction constrains further energy transformations from a constructive to a maintenance scenario, thus providing a clue to understanding how DP regulatory oversight changes after completion of somatic development.

Before “senescence begins” in humans at approximately 30 years of age, Yates represented flows and transformations of energy as “open thermodynamic systems [that] necessarily organize energy processing as cyclic physical action modes.” These are envisioned each day metaphorically as a helix so that, as senescence emerges, the amount of Gibbs’ free energy that can be extracted each day “surreptitiously decreases” [23]. Thus, internal entropy increases as coherence and complexity are lost due to the breakdown of regulatory oversight and control [24]. Subsequently, the area of the metaphorical helix decreases, transforming into a progressively truncating ellipse that eventually closes, thereby effectively setting the lifetime energy budget [23]. As that limit is approached, energy throughput slowly erodes order causing the organism to become fragile, vulnerable to intrinsic disease and eventually to succumb [25].

Thus, Yates [23] concluded that “the central and most general physical cause of senescence (i.e., aging) is diminishing energy throughput” resulting from the decay of regulatory processes. While being the energetic basis of mortality, progressive metabolic insufficiency is a consequence and a contributing factor for aging, whereas gradual loss of regulatory oversight and control is its proximate cause.

Consistent with Yates’ thermodynamic application of the second law to aging, Hayflick [26] explained that age changes occur spontaneously due to irreparable losses in molecular fidelity, not governed by genetic influence. No reference was made to regulatory breakdown or any other possible process as a contributing factor(s) for molecular instability that initiates senescence. However, he suggested that strong element of aging uniformity exists because errors occur first in the same families of most vulnerable molecules in similar cells, organs, or objects. Thus, a “weakest link first to fail mechanism” accounts for similarity in the aging phenotype as it progresses within species members [1,26]. However, the “weakest link first to fail” process implies sequential expression of the aging phenotype, which is inconsistent with the generally accepted view that aging simultaneously affects all parts of the body [11].

Since energy processing is not the same throughout the body, spontaneous decay of a specific metabolic pathway(s) cannot be a primary factor subserving organismal senescence. Instead, metabolic collapse occurs throughout the body, secondarily to some initiating event. The simple basis for this speculation is that caloric restriction (CR), similar to aging, diminishes energy throughput but extends rather than shortens lifespan. This observation suggests that by reducing caloric intake to a level above starvation, food restriction and resultant damping of molecular thermodynamics slows down the expression of damage associated with transformation of the entire body proportional to the age at which it is begun [27]. Nonetheless, death is inevitable, albeit occurring later than it would if food were available ad libitum. Thus, organismal senescence requires maladaptive, energy-dependent events whose rates of occurrence can be thermodynamically modulated. For example, certain agents that attenuate constitutive levels of mTOR signaling, thereby presumably reducing metabolic activity, concomitantly lower DNA damage from endogenous reactive oxygen species which can extend life [28]. More relevant to the theory is that CR-diminished DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) while extending life span [29].

Without describing the series of events responsible for age-related breakdown of regulation, Yates provided insight into developmental stage dynamics and how they participate in the emergence of morphostasis from morphogenesis, the initiation of senescence, and the acceleration of morpholysis from morphostasis. Accordingly, attention is now turned to regulatory behavioral dynamics as they direct events subserving the continuity of development and aging.



[7. Regulation of Organismal Development]
The DP is recognized as an evolved biological program within which interacting processes create heterogeneous shapes, sizes, and structural features on a dynamic trajectory from embryo to adult [30].

Clues to understanding the relationship between development and aging exist in Morphogenesis: An Essay on Development [31]. At the time of his work, recognizing the growing amount of data on developmental phenomena, Bonner realized that there was no unifying theory with which to interpret them. This observation is not unlike the current situation in aging research, where the assumed complexity of the aging process has been an insurmountable barrier to identifying a specific mechanism that regulates its origins and progression. Kirkwood [32] suggested that data on aging have grown in a patchwork way, through the pursuit of specific single-aspect theories. He felt that, after many decades of such pursuit, single-aspect theories have limited explanatory power, such that interacting theories may be better analyzed using methods that have the power to determine how its apparent cumulative effects cause aging.

Accordingly, he suggested the application of network theories to determine how individual mechanisms interact with each other [33,34].

Unlike contemporary biogerontolotists, Bonner [31] saw greater promise in examining aspects of the total organism to unify developmental theory. Morphogenetic stages are identified as products of structural transformation guided by DP regulatory mechanisms. Twenty-three stages/modules of embryogenesis are recognized [35,36], beyond which stages of development continue until constructive stages of the DP end. Somatic maturation occurs in humans at approximately 20 years of age [37].

While successfully describing progression of many aspects of total embryonic development, Bonner recognized that “regulation”, a most elusive quality, was required to unify the stages of structural transformation into a coherent integrated soma. This was an important issue since developmental regulation makes the coordinated transformation of the entire organism possible during all stages of morphogenesis, allowing it to function as a whole throughout development. It is important to stress that despite exponentially growing knowledge of individual constructive and maintenance metabolic pathways, none were known to display such holistic influence. Bonner and others before him were frustrated by their inability to provide a scientific explanation for the phenomenon. The mysterious nature of organismal developmental regulation inspired Hans Driesch, a biologist, early embryologist, and philosopher, to explain it using the neo-vitalist philosophy of entelechy [38]. Knowing that all cells in the body contain the same genetic code despite each having different structures and functions, Bonner was unable to speculate on how a synchronic informational genotype could functionally interact with a diachronic dynamic phenotype. So, to avoid potentially “supernatural” aspects of vitalism, he simply concluded that organismal development results from the dynamic interaction of ever-changing constructive and limiting processes.

Prior to the work of Waddington [39,40,41], the difficulty Bonner experienced in explaining “regulation” derived from the paucity of information on how gene expression is influenced by internal and external environmental “epigenetic” factors. Although epigenetics has been a rapidly growing field of study, it took almost two decades for evidence to emerge around DNA methylation and its developmental role to switch genes off and on [42]. A functional relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression emerged during the 1990′s [43] when it was recognized that patterns of gene expression differ greatly among different cell types, while all of an organism’s somatic cells contain the same genome. More recently, the process of activating or silencing genes was discovered through the study of certain chemical tags or epigenetic modifications that attach to different parts of DNA and its associated proteins. Thus, while not altering the underlying genetic code, the epigenetic process controls gene expression, thereby affecting the proteome, specific structures, and functions of different tissues.

Thus, when Bonner was creating a unified hypothesis for developmental biology, knowledge of epigenetics was just emerging. It was not until decades later that its involvement in gene expression was better understood. This lack of information contributed significantly to the difficulty in understanding global somatic regulation, i.e., how information within the genotype which is the same in all cells can be translated into a changing phenotype. Had epigenetics been better understood during his time, Bonner may have found a more satisfactory explanation for the “mysterious” and special biological force of organismal regulation [31,38].



[8. Global Influence]
Questioning the conventional wisdom that the aging process emerges from an amalgamation of random, detrimental effects, Ohsawa et al. [44] suggested that particular cellular pathways affect its existence and expression. The challenge was to understand the mechanistic basis of how such pathways and metabolic states regulate aging.

The complexity of organismal aging and development derives from the multitude of molecular constituents and robust processes that interact across many spatio-temporal levels. That robustness suggests the existence of relative simplicity in holistic oversight of developmental and aging dynamics, perhaps involving global constraints that ensure similar outcomes despite fluctuation in the underlying mechanisms [45,46]. Thus, it is assumed that multiple mechanisms of the soma are subject to regulatory oversight by a process that consolidates them into a single program.

An important premise of the current theory is that the global key for regulating development and aging resides within the genome and hence, is present in all parts of the body. This life-long influence over the total organism in one form or another is a key factor linking developmental “regulation” to the mechanism of aging. Upon completion of sequential, non-repeating developmental stages, the expression of the regulatory process is modified during morphostasis to appropriately direct dynamics of the stable, young adult organism. While adaptive was selected, this modal alteration of expression beyond morphogenesis presents a condition within which regulatory behavior favoring the potential for emerging senescence exists.

The global regulatory influence of the DP is particularly relevant to formulate a unified aging theory because senescence “should always be a generalized deterioration, and never due largely to changes in a single (physiological) system.” [11]. Williams and others [11,47,48] stressed that senescence simultaneously affects all organs and systems “In mammals and especially man”. Medawar [49] agreed but stipulated that among the multitude of changes associated with aging, gerontologists should distinguish cause from effect, so as to identify one or perhaps a few ultimate causes. Williams disagreed, claiming that “such small number of primary factors is a logical impossibility”. This assumption is consistent with contemporary views that aging is multifactorial. Williams [11] was correct in assuming that of all the maladaptive, age-related, changes in gene expression occurring throughout the body during aging, no specific one or few is responsible for causing it. However, he was incorrect in assuming that the multitude of changes associated with aging are causal, not consequential. He also failed to consider the possible role of developmental regulation in aging. In contrast to the concept that aging is multifactorial, failing regulatory oversight of post-maturational morphostasis cycles is a singular source of senescence, as described in the current theory.

The relationship between aging and the DP has received little attention despite reports of progressive, age-related, seemingly “programmatic” changes that occur in humans beyond age thirty and at appropriate ages in other species that nurture their offspring [11,50]. This characteristic of post-developmental regulatory dynamics could be viewed as prima facie evidence for the existence of an aging program. Depending upon interpretation of the theory’s supporting data, it may be; however, then again, it may not.

“Regulation” has been overlooked by contemporary biogerontologists as playing a central role in the aging process. The reason for this oversight is perhaps the difficulty in grasping the concept that one process can not only sequentially regulate construction, but also transient stability and deconstruction of the complete soma. Examination of developmental regulatory dynamics at various stages of life provides an understanding of this seemingly paradoxical relationship.



[9. Regulation of Non-Repeating Developmental Stages]
An important first step in understanding the continuous relationship between development and aging is to consider that “regulation”, which begins within the DP at conception is a process that is expressed during the procession of life unto death. That process not only evolved to direct construction of the specific products of each developmental stage, but also to preserve the post-morphogenetic stage of morphostasis for as long as possible. It is necessary that the character and expression of regulatory oversight be altered in order to appropriately oversee successful progression and completion of those two different DP processes.

Upon conception, development begins during an initial embryonic stage(s) that forms tissue patterns and novel structures as products of autonomous, self-organizing cellular mechanisms [51]. Thereafter, in compliance with regulatory oversight, complexity of morphogenesis increases.

A pattern-to-pattern characteristic of developmental stage progression could allude to the order of somatic construction, i.e., the “assembly of parts, or the particular arrangements of cell states in three-dimensional space” [52]. It could also describe the dynamics of regulatory events that direct appropriate synthesis and assembly of parts during each stage. The latter case subserves the regulatory process of development-aging continuity.

Regulatory behavior which governs the progression of each developmental stage is an important process, the outcome of which relates to specific products that are appropriate for the local assembly of structural “parts”. The products of each developmental stage are emergent molecules that interconnect by providing a substrate for the synthesis of novel structures for the next developmental module. They not only act as a substrate for continued development, but also serve an epigenetic function which, in conjunction with other epigenetic modifiers, determines regulatory gene expression while constraining behaviors and directions of events associated with a novel outcome for each developmental module. Epigenetic influences derived from previous stage products, as well as within-stage gene expression, carry great weight in affecting product formation of any given stage [53]. This important factor affecting regulatory “behavior” is central to understanding the emergence of senescence from the redundant stage of morphostasis.

Each developmental stage follows a general pattern due to oversight by the same, albeit epigenetically modified, sequence of regulatory factors. Thus, one stage follows the other, not only in numerical sequence, but by being connected through the sharing of the substrate and essential epigenetic information required for proper gene expression and progression of the complete morphogenetic series. This process causes each stage of somatic construction to consist of different structural parts that are linked pursuant to guidance by the same “basic” regulatory sequence.

In addition to the synthesis of new parts, a core concept of the present theory is that the basic “chain of march” or specific sequence of genetic components within the regulatory process that directs phenotypic alteration never changes. Unlike the patterns of construction that change phenotype from stage to stage, the basic underlying pattern of regulation stays the same, except that epigenetically influenced, qualitative changes in expression of common regulatory sequence components, produce specific products appropriate for physical construction of each body part. Thus, while regulatory sequences or execution patterns directing homeodynamics during stages of development are similarly constructed, their components vary qualitatively at each developmental module, causing the outcomes to be different.

Thus, somatic development cannot be isomorphic with a defined programmatic structure, but instead unfolds more “like the development of an ecosystem in which [after process initiation] events follow a predictable [but not exact] sequence in the absence of any program.” [23,54]. Given the lack of specific and necessary regulatory information required for completion, additional guidance for structural transformation comes from actions within and interactions between developmental modules. Developmental restrictions [55], as well as bias, do not limit the phenotypes available for selection of a specific design or product at each stage of somatic construction accounting, in part, for different developmental trajectories among even closely related individuals. Since the DP progression follows a pattern to pattern format, each stage occurs only once. Furthermore, because it is non-repeating, it does not progress to chaotic behavior that is at the heart of the aging mechanism. Instead, each DP stage is finite and initiated by qualitatively different factors, consistent with determinative behavior, which prevents aging during development, as discussed later in greater detail.

Thus, based upon differential dynamics of the developmental regulatory mechanism, human beings look like others of their species, but none are identical. Even monozygous twins are not exactly the same due to differences in modifying epigenetic components of the same regulatory operational pathways, albeit small, which cause different outcomes nonetheless [56]. Individual organisms undergo multiple changes in response to independent gene actions, as well as their internal states and external environments that alter and shape their unique developmental trajectories [57,58,59]. Because these cooperative and combined effects are not specifically programmed, each developmental unit is “execution-driven” as much as it is “program driven” [60]. This processing explains how the different stages of development can emerge from a single but ubiquitous, genetic, regulatory “backbone” or sequence. Functional phenotypes resulting from such combined genetic and epigenetic/environmental influences promote evolvability and thus favor evolution [61,62,63].

The relevance of the developmental regulatory process to the theory relates to the fact that the product of one developmental stage epigenetically affects expression of the next initiating gene(s) in the construction sequence for each particular cell type. Both product and expressed gene(s) create the initial conditions from which the next stage proceeds. Since the non-repeating stages of morphogenesis end upon somatic maturation, the regulatory process must be appropriately modified to accommodate the absence of emerging new structures during morphostasis.



[10. Redundant Expression of the Last Morphogenetic Stage]
It is during the last morphogenetic stage, upon initial emergence of the adult phenotype, that non-repeating stages of morphogenesis end along with non-repeating qualitative changes in its tissue specific regulatory components. Some investigators proposed that when the DP ends, one or more unprogrammed stages could continue to be expressed thereafter, but without purpose. Presumably, such continuation of various processes associated with the DP into adulthood, cause somatic destabilization and initiate senescence. Magalhães [10] proposed that during the expression of the DP, a continuation of patterns that are adaptive during development become maladaptive in adulthood, eroding somatic integrity and causing aging. He explained that overexpression of developmental patterns occurs because a “short-sighted watchmaker”, i.e., evolution, responsible for creating the DP inadvertently overlooked the need for its eventual termination [10]. Consistent with theories of others, over-expression of the developmentally related events presumably alters outcomes of post-morphogenetic, regulatory signaling, thereby eroding somatic form and function for any number of possible reasons previously cited [11,12,13,14,15,16,17]. There are several basic problems with such hypotheses.

First of all, just as “God does not play dice with the universe” [64], so “Evolution does not overlook essential details of its creations” [author’s opinion]. Continuation of maladaptive developmental “construction” patterns into adulthood is structurally improbable because the progression of morphogenetic stages follows a pattern-to-pattern process, whereby the product of one stage initiates the next, as does its product with the next, etc., until development is complete. Thereafter, no novel emergent products remain to initiate additional developmental modules and outcomes. Since no adaptive purpose would be served if they were part of a developmental program that presumably completed the evolved task of somatic construction, they would not occur. If they inadvertently did, they would be selected against because NS is still influential when morphogenesis ends at about the human age of 20 years. Moreover, somatic construction and developmental transformation of the soma cannot continue indefinitely because physical limitations, morphogenetic construction rules, phyletic developmental constraints, laws of diffusion, hydraulics, and physical support prevent it [55]. Finally, once development is complete, signaling pathways for mechanisms regulating novel pattern formation are typically inactivated, thereby preventing further developmental change in structures related to morphogenesis [65].

Thus, one might expect that the DP ends upon completion of its last stage. However, if “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution” [66], as Dobzhansky confidently stated, then termination of the DP and its “regulatory process” would also be expected to end. If so, then the integrated workings of evolution would seemingly cease to be involved in the dynamics of living beyond morphogenesis into young adulthood. As a result, the post-morphogenetic, expression of morphostasis, senescence, and accelerating aging would lack global influence, and thus “not make sense”. Importantly, termination of the DP would prevent initiation and control of somatic morphostasis which was selected to ensure completion of the evolutionary obligation of reproduction in species whose offspring require parental nurturing.

Understanding the need for regulatory oversight while accepting that construction of novel products from randomly continuing, non-repeating developmental stages beyond morphogenesis would be improbable; thus, the DP must continue in an alternative form. Upon completion of development, dynamic degrees of freedom for further construction of the soma are “frozen out”, causing “the series of progressive, nonrepetitive changes occurring during morphogenesis” [22] to end. To do so requires limiting and redundantly expressing DP regulatory oversight to those functions, as performed during execution of the last developmental module. These constraints on regulatory expression prevent production of new structures and temporarily maintain the young adult phenotype. It is during this pre-senescence period that Yates [23] metaphorically described daily energy processing as helical, i.e., cycles within which the risk for expanding internal entropy increases.

For the last stage of the DP to become redundantly expressed, its regulatory process must be modified to comply with the rules that evolved for proper guidance of each morphogenetic stage. The regulatory process of developmental stage progression is initiated by the emergent structure of the preceding developmental stage that not only provides a structural basis for assembly of the next product, but also epigenetically affects expression of the initiating regulatory gene(s) for that stage. It is the combination of these epigenetic and genetic influences, along with other environmental factors that establish the “initial conditions”, that determine how that stage will proceed. During maintenance of morphostasis, deterministic behavior is strictly dependent upon precise redundancy, which will degrade if conditions for its maintenance are disturbed.

To accomplish and sustain redundancy while employing the established regulatory process, the product of each morphostasis cycle must be the same as the one originally produced by the last morphogenetic module. Thus, the final product of the morphogenetic stage then becomes the initiating product of each subsequent, redundant morphostasis cycle. Thus, during the second iteration of the regulatory process governing the last developmental stage, its product becomes the epigenetic influence that directs gene expression to produce the same products of the preceding cycle. Thus, redundancy occurs to maintain fidelity of the young adult soma as each cycle is precisely re-expressed. Similarly, expression of the same initiating gene(s) would be epigenetically affected as during the first iteration of the last DP stage. As a result, the initial conditions would be replicated for each successive cycle, thereby allowing morphostasis to continue in the absence of aging for a period of time lasting in humans for approximately the first decade of young adulthood.

As generally recognized, the “genetic program the genome is optimized for reproduction… including child rearing” and the “care of dependent progeny is as important to reproduction as gamete production” [10,11]. Thus, besides birthing, mammalian reproductive success requires parental devotion of relatively long time periods to nurturing, protecting, and educating offspring before they become independent. Since evolutionary obligation in mammals demands that young adults remain viable, fit, and capable of providing their progeny with essential requirements for survival until independence, it is logical that a mechanism to sustain such prolonged vitality evolved as part of the DP.

Because redundant expression of the last developmental regulatory process was selected to initiate and temporarily sustain the adaptive stage of morphostasis during the first decade of human adulthood, the opinion that the DP no longer affects the soma beyond morphogenesis is incorrect. Its regulatory influence continues for the remainder of life. However, beyond NS, redundancy progressively fails, altering behavior of the regulatory mechanism from causal determinism to deterministic chaos. It is important to note that the behavior of the regulatory process, whether in non-repeating or redundant stages, is malleable, and though its behavior may change throughout life, it continues oversight of structural modification, albeit to the soma’s detriment beyond morphostasis, i.e., during morpholysis.

This behavioral change causes aging that emerges within the failing regulatory apparatus to appear “programmatic”. Furthermore, increasing loss of regulatory redundancy increases chaos over time, thereby also accelerating the rate of aging [67]. Thus, the regulatory process, albeit increasingly damaged over time, remains linked with the last developmental stage throughout life.



[11. Molecular Components]
The molecular construct of the regulatory mechanism contains a common and specific “genetic backbone” which exists as part of the genome and, hence, is located within all cells of the body. Thus, its global distribution accounts for the ability of the regulatory process to influence the complete soma simultaneously and throughout life. Specific expression of the regulatory genes is affected by the epigenetic landscape(s) existing in the multitude of different somatic cells and tissue types of the organism, as well as by the product of the preceding stage, making them interdependent components of phenotype regulation. Gene expression is also influenced by chromatin remodeling, environmental and other local epigenetic factors, as well as DNA damage repair. Thus, while each stage of a developmental sequence may not be specifically orchestrated, there are genetic, initiating events in concert with the product(s) of the preceding stage that set the epigenetic landscape for the current cycle. In this way, genetic and epigenetic actions “influence” the general direction of somatic transformations, but not their specific trajectories. Because of the differential influences of initiating and emergent epigenetic factors, genes are expressed differently across stages of life [53].

While developmental regulatory events occur simultaneously to coordinate actions throughout the total organism, the signaling processes that direct integrated functions remain unknown. However, it is reasonable to speculate on the general composition of the global regulatory mechanism that oversees phenotypic change across the span of a lifetime.

In his discussion of regulatory control of morphogenesis, Yates implied that the pattern-to-pattern sequencing of developmental stages is guided by a common regulatory mechanism initiated by “…genes [which] act as dynamical constraints shaping product formation at each stage [that]…act as new constraints on the next round of dynamics. Epigenetic influences carry great weight…” [68].

If the regulatory system affects phenotypic changes across the lifespan, and since the genome is the same throughout the body, it must be the unique epigenetic environments of the various cells and tissues that affect differential expression of genes, both temporally and appropriately for their geographic (spatial) locations. Thus, epigenetics makes the essential contribution that explains how a constant or fixed genotype could direct the various changes in phenotypes that occur during the transition from development to advanced age, i.e., how a synchronic informational genotype could functionally interact with a diachronic dynamic phenotype.

The theory assumes that initiation of each regulatory cycle begins with the epigenetic product of the preceding stage in conjunction with non-coding DNA (ncDNA), to which a major portion of transcriptional activity in mammalian cells is attributed. It is proposed that ncDNA participates in the process of developmental stage initiation because it contains sequences that act as regulatory elements to determine when and where genes are activated or not, and provides sites for transcription factors to bind and either activate or repress transcription. Additionally, regulatory elements of ncDNA include promoters, enhancers, silencers, and insulators, and also provide instructions for the formation of certain kinds of RNA.

Although ncDNA does not code for proteins, its transcription occurs throughout eukaryotic genomes, generating a wide array of ncRNAs [69] that account for a major portion of the transcriptional activity observed in cells. Some of these affect genes and interact with protein complexes to modify chromatin structure [70], demonstrating their importance as regulatory molecules. One large class of ncRNAs includes those transcribed over the promoter regions of nearby protein coding genes. As a result of these important roles, ncRNA molecules have been considered by some to be genes [71] that play an important role in an epigenetic network, thereby highlighting their prominent regulatory role [72].

The assumption that ncDNA is part of the initiating sequence for each regulatory cycles is also based upon the experimental evidence from Hayano et al. [50] who reported on a murine system within which endonuclease-induced DNA damage, i.e., non-mutagenic double-stranded breaks (DSBs), could be precisely controlled at frequencies only a few-fold above spontaneously occurring, normal background levels. The DSBs that were created primarily in non-coding regions altered the epigenome while initiating and accelerating organismal aging in young adult laboratory mice [50].

Both genetic and epigenetic factors set the initial conditions for the newly beginning regulatory sequence. This is an important role, since the regulatory behavior beyond morphogenesis during morphostasis and morpholysis observes laws of determinative chaos (DC) and, thus, displays sensitive dependence upon initial conditions (SDIC). Subsequently, ncRNAs that are transcribed from the ncDNA to further affect gene expression modify the chromatin structure by interacting with protein complexes that further establish and maintain specific epigenomic landscapes [69,72,73,74,75]. Additionally, some sections of ncDNA transcribe ncRNA over promoter regions where they affect coding gene expression and play important roles in post-transcriptional regulation [69,76,77]. Thus, they initiate expression of protein coding genes as a secondary function of the initial events. Coding genes then direct production of essential proteins, explicitly specifying their primary structures. Thereafter, epigenetic factors existing as parts of the spatial and temporal environments create dynamical constraints on a subsequent higher-order protein structure, folding, targeting, scaffold attachment regions, origins of DNA replication, centromeres, and telomeres. Since coding genes are played upon to produce appropriate products for construction, they are not likely to be part of the initial conditions in the regulatory sequence for each developmental stage. Coding genes do have regulatory sequences but they are used to control protein production, not to maintain a stable young adult soma or sustain youth during morphostasis. Thus, it would seem that if coding genes are responsible for creating structure, i.e., protein, no individual one or combination could be a primary regulatory gene responsible for the establishing patterns that occur during the aging process.

The uniqueness of “regulation” that guides developmental stages and morphostasis throughout the entire organism is proposed as having the potential to similarly affect organismal aging as the life cycle transcends the limits of the DP morphostasis component (initial stage of adulthood) in order to experience senescence and accelerate aging (midlife and advanced age) and its challenges.



[12. Determinism and Chaos]
The holistic organismal regulatory mechanism described herein can sustain somatic integrity, health, and vitality, or can cause disorganization, dysfunction, and failure depending upon the behavioral conditions under which it is operating. Causal determinism (or determinism) avoids aging during morphogenesis and precisely redundant morphostasis, whereas loss of redundancy causes determinative chaos (or chaos) to emerge, allowing senescence to begin and morpholysis to proceed exponentially.

Determinism states that every event (effect) is influenced by its antecedent events (cause) and conditions consistent with the laws of nature [78]. In other words, the precise combination of regulatory events at a certain time will result in a predictable outcome. To the extent that a system can be perfectly isolated when identical starting conditions are repeatedly imposed, its subsequent behavior should be determined by those initial conditions and exhibit unique evolution (Figure 1A).

Thus, progressive elements that are determined by initial as well as boundary conditions follow a common sequence and, importantly, are finite or non-repeating [22]. In biology, determinism is applicable during morphogenesis and redundant morphostasis, but for different reasons. In the first case, non-repetition of developmental stages prevents chaos from developing, whereas chaos is avoided during morphostasis, at least temporarily, by the precise redundancy of the last developmental stage.

In contrast to determinism, deterministic chaos [79] presents the paradox of linking two seemingly incompatible notions of predictability or determinism with unpredictability. Chaos begins with gradual erosion of regulatory redundancy during late stage morphostasis, thereby initiating senescence.

While chaos describes a lack of predictability, it does not mean randomness, which can produce an ensemble of different outputs from the same set of parameters and initial conditions. In contrast, chaotic systems are deterministic, dynamic, and nonlinear [80]. Because they display exquisitely sensitive dependence upon initial conditions (SDIC), have patterns, and lack random components, they are quite ordered and even predictable on short time scales. Lyapunov time is the characteristic time scale upon which a dynamical system becomes chaotic, thus mirroring the limits of predictability [81]. In practice, a meaningful prediction cannot be made over an interval of more than two or three times the Lyapunov time. However, small changes at the start of a chaotic process that are repeatedly expressed will exponentially degrade predictability over extended intervals of relative time to produce complex, long-term behavior that causes unpredictability to emerge [82]. Aging displays such chaotic behavior by creating trajectories that are unique to each individual. Predictable changes occur early on; however, with time, dissociation of trajectories, even among closely related individuals, diverge and become unpredictable. The empirical observation of very old (>90 years) humans suggests that an interval that is at least twice the Lyapunov time makes the prediction of future events seemingly random and unpredictable. Uncertainty of forecast increases exponentially during aging where the effect of chaos is consistent with predictions of the Gompertz function [34]. Thus, the alteration of initial conditions, however small, is persistently magnified by dynamics of the system, causing exponential amplification of errors. Two nearby initial conditions in generic position will give rise to trajectories that separate with time, amplifying small errors (Figure 1B). As time passes, the system “appears” to behave randomly, such that meaningful predictions can no longer be made [83]. Such behavior that looks out of control but which functions according to unseen rules or organization has been defined as “stochastic behaviour occurring in a deterministic system” and is sometimes called ‘constrained randomness’ [84]. Because SDIC is crucial in chaos theory, it has been incorporated in similar concepts by other authors who intend to explain the dynamics of aging [67]. The apparent randomness, particularly related to ageing, can be interpreted in the light of chaos theory [85,86,87]. This is an important issue relevant to the divergence of characteristics that occur even among closely related individuals, such as monozygotic twins as they grow older and older, representing the root of unpredictable aging trajectories.

In light of the relevance of the current theory, it is not chaos that initiates changes in initial conditions. Instead, it becomes a dominant behavior of the regulatory system once morphostasis redundancy is lost due to damage-based structural change that alters initiating genes and thereby outcomes of each subsequent cycle. As this occurs, the influence of the remaining redundant regulatory cycles of the last developmental stage continue to be expressed. However, their effect to sustain a youthful phenotype becomes progressively degraded. As damage quantitatively reduces the number of genes with appropriate structure to provide correct initial conditions, accompanying epigenetic changes accrue causing chaos to exponentially degrade the phenotype.



[13. Characteristics of Determinism and Chaos]
Persistent determinative behavior remains predictable (Figure 1A). This property is not inconsistent with systems that exhibit chaotic behavior so long as there is SDIC. Although initially predictable, when conditions change over sufficient time, the behavior of chaotic systems eventually appear to behave randomly relative to the starting conditions (Figure 1B).

The shifting influence of causal determinism to deterministic chaos during the changing expression of developmental regulatory dynamics underlies the emergence of senescence from morphostasis and eventually to the exponential acceleration of aging (Table 1).

A diagrammatic representation of dynamic changes in the organismal/holistic regulatory mechanism from embryo to old age (Figure 2).



[14. Maintenance vs. Morphostasis]
Maintenance has been described as the avoidance or repair of age-related damage through energy expending processes, excluding those for somatic construction. These temporarily preserve tissue integrity and extend adult organismal lifespan [88] in opposition to the age-promoting, maladaptive effects of concomitantly decaying morphostasis regulation.

Based upon Monte Carlo modeling [89], Rozhok and DeGregori [90] proposed that a somatic maintenance program (SMP) evolved specifically to enhance survival. In addition to the SMP, other processes in aggregate, such as various tumor suppressor gene functions (including DNA damage-induced apoptosis), autophagy, purifying somatic selection, immune surveillance, and morphogen-like controller molecules called morphostats [8], also participate in promoting somatic maintenance, thereby extending lifespan.

Assuming that somatic maintenance is active during the period of exponentially increasing death rates, and since human and captive animal mortality curves approximate the physiological aging curve, the authors felt that opposition to aging via the SMP could be graphically represented as an inverse plot of the Gompertz function [91] which begins in humans at approximately age 30 [92]. Rozhok and DeGregori [90] called the inverse of the Gomperz function a “somatic maintenance curve” (SMC), which presumably describes the interaction of age-promoting accumulation of structural damage due to redundancy loss and the SMP that opposes those effects. (Figure 3).

Resistance to the progression of aging by maintenance is acknowledged as a life extending process. However, it is quite different from the unique programmed process of morphostasis, during which the young adult soma is temporarily maintained in the absence of aging. The relationship of somatic maintenance and morphostasis is presented in Figure 3. It is worthy of note that life table aging rates suggest deceleration of mortality at very old ages [93]. One interpretation of these data could be that maintenance improves or is more effective in those living to extremely advanced years. This interesting observation has often been debated and is briefly mentioned because it is relevant to the current theory.

Plots of Gompertz function begin in humans at about 30 years of age and are sigmoidal. However, unlike a simple logistic function in which both asymptotes are approached symmetrically, the left-hand or lower value asymptote is approached more rapidly than the right-hand or future value asymptote which represents a deceleration of the aging rate due to exhaustion of morphostasis regulatory redundancy and unimpeded effects of any remaining maintenance process (Figure 4).

This special case of Richards curve [94] provides a clue to the nature of existing conditions before senescence begins and during the late stages of aging. Although the complete Gompertz function represents a correlation of aging with death, its abrupt initiation suggests that senescence is “released” from suppression as 30 years of age approaches. In contrast, since loss of redundancy has been suggested as a possible driving force of aging [67], its slowing toward the end of life could be due to redundancy exhaustion and any continuing effects of maintenance.

The Gompertz equation adequately represents progression of age-related adult mortality, but not that of younger individuals [95] when death due to aging is uncommon. Makeham [96] complemented the Gompertz function by including an age-independent term. The combined functions, commonly referred to as the Gompertz–Makeham (G-M) law of mortality, describe the frequency of deaths as a function of age in human populations throughout life beginning with a span of ages from birth to 20 years (presumed duration of the DP) and ending with age-related deaths from 30 until approximately 90 years and beyond. This pattern of age-related mortality provides considerable information about intrinsic factors underlying the emergence of senescence and the subsequent acceleration of aging [34].

Reliability models based upon defective redundant systems could explain why mortality rates of biological organisms increase exponentially with age as described by the Gompertz equation [67]. While differing in process from that described by Gavrilov and Gavrilova [67], the aging mechanism proposed in this theory is compliant with their suggestion that, as components of a redundant regulatory system such as that needed to sustain morphostasis are lost, the failure of the whole system (the organism) occurs at an exponential rate (during morpholysis).

While the Gompertz segment of the G-M plot receives most attention, the age interval from 20 to 30 years is essentially ignored (Figure 5).

This unique post-developmental segment of life represents a time when maturity and maximal stability are achieved during young adulthood, when most physiological processes are at peak performance capability. It is also contiguous with the end of development and the beginning of senescence when natural selection is operable but rapidly loses strength. The absence, or extremely low frequency of, age-related death during this decade has significant evolutionary benefit regarding reproduction, for which its underlying mechanism was selected as previously described. Thus, morphostasis is distinctly different from somatic maintenance.



[15. Shroot’s Metaphor-Linking Development to Aging]
The dynamic processes of development and aging have been traditionally considered as occurring sequentially, transitioning from the former to the latter at maturity. In humans, thirty years of age has been designated as that transition point based upon the completion of optimal structural development (maturation of male and female somatic characteristics) and the acquisition of peak physical/athletic performance capabilities [23].

The sequential phases of development and aging have been described metaphorically as a “hill”, the confluence of which is the apex. The metaphor assumes ascending and descending segments to represent the incremental growth of development and the decremental decline of aging, respectively [97].

Development is presumed to end at the apex after which senescence immediately begins. Thereafter, the soma undergoes a monotonic decline and loss of reserve that rapidly proceeds at a rate of about 0.5 and 1.0% per year, depending on the individual and the organ system being studied. The descent eventually leads to death from “old age” when physiological losses cross the minimum threshold for system autonomy [98]. The supposition that development and aging occur sequentially raised the “long-standing, but increasingly relevant question; how are the two related?” [99,100,101].

If development and aging were to occur sequentially, as described metaphorically by Schroots [97], the Gompertz function should begin at 20 years of age, immediately upon completion of the DP when somatic construction presumably ends. However, the mortality slope of the developmental curve abruptly stops rising in humans at about that age, remaining nearly horizontal thereafter (Figure 5). Thus, Shroot’s metaphor does not recognize that the G-M plot contains an intermediate stage when the soma exists in a state neither of development nor aging (Figure 5). If it did, the obvious answer to “how are development and aging linked?” would be through morphostasis, following significant change in the regulatory dynamics that previously guided morphogenesis. This interval of peak vitality in the absence of aging that bridges the life stages of development and senescence lasts approximately half as long as the time from conception to completion of somatic construction. The assumption that aging is ambiguous during this period of life can be tested by using the epigentic clock; however, this has not yet been attempted (Steve Horvath, personal communication, 13 July 2019; “we did not yet look at it carefully because we don’t have good data from people younger than 30”.)

Aging is delayed during morphostasis, but only temporarily, because its mechanism for stochastic damage repair is error-prone, causing failure within a few years due to accumulation of genetic damage, epigenetic alteration, and progressive loss of morphostasis regulatory redundancy.

Morphostasis ends with the gradual onset of senescence resulting from stochastic damage that accumulates to critical mass toward the end of the “plateau period”. This changes its initial conditions and, due to determinative chaos, its outcome, which ends the stage of non-aging somatic stability.

The third phase begins at approximately 30 years of age, with the onset of senescence and exponential progression of aging. As the end or morphostasis approaches, the beneficial effects of purifying negative selection is declining, thereby allowing DNA damage and subsequent epigenetic influence to alter initial conditions of the redundant morphostasis regulatory mechanism. Thus, regulatory behavior changes from causal determinism to deterministic chaos, which initiates senescence and subsequently accelerates morpholysis.



[16. Senescence and Accelerating Rate of Aging]
The present theory describes an evidence-based, evolved mechanism that initiates senescence and drives the exponential progression of aging in humans and other mammals. The reason for excluding other taxonomic groups is not to preclude the possibility of the mechanism applicable to them, but rather because it assumes an evolutionary requirement for continuation and redundancy of the last morphogenetic stage into young adulthood. It was selected to temporarily prevent aging and ensure parental vitality or provide opportunity for intergenerational transfer [102] in species whose offspring require nurturing, which does not occur universally, for example in some reptiles.

Prior to describing the specific aging mechanism, popular concepts in the multifactorial process of aging were reviewed. In most cases, the concepts were drawn from studies of older adult, organisms, which is the primary reason that the cause of aging has remained elusive.

During the 1990s, the discovery of a daf-2 gene mutation that doubled the lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans led Kenyon to suggest the existence of “a universal regulatory mechanism” that determines the duration of life [103,104]. This was a seemingly logical assumption since daf-2 regulates a variety of physiological process at various stages of life by exerting control over many other genes. However, despite altering the gene’s expression and changing rates of aging, similar changes were reported by many investigators who altered expression of other genes and processes, leading to the conclusion that aging is multifactorial. As a result of the apparent complexity of the aging process, the concept of a unique “regulatory mechanism” was shelved as it seemingly became more obvious that singular control of such a multiplex process did not exist. Kenyon proposed that quantifying, analyzing, and understanding the aging process would require multi-layer and multi-tissue analysis, making it exceedingly difficult to accomplish that objective [105].

In agreement, Liochev claimed that the mystery of human mortality will never be solved because “aging results from a significant number of causes”, such that “counteracting one or several of them would make little difference” [106]. Data showing the widespread accumulation of molecular and cellular damages that interact in complex ways at various somatic levels suggested that many aging theories are simultaneously true [107]. Thus, testing them is the current pursuit of most aging research based upon the assumption that such efforts could lead to interventions that slow or alter aging. Maynard et al. proposed that through efforts to understand how DNA damage leads to aging, therapeutic approaches to prevent it are central to extend healthy life [108]. This shift in focus from basic research to therapeutic application is now dominant because the presumed multifactorial nature of aging is thought to increase susceptibility to a wide range of pathologies.

This widespread opinion directed research efforts away from the basic question of how aging occurs to manipulating its rates for therapeutic application in geriatric medicine [109]. Hayflick [110] opined that failure to distinguish biogerontology from geriatric medicine is the most serious impediment to understanding the aging process [26]. He stated “There is a continuing belief that the resolution of age-associated diseases will advance our understanding of the fundamental aging process. It will not” [110]. “Just as the resolution of childhood pathologies…did not advance our understanding of childhood development, neither will study of the aging phenotype reveal the mechanism of aging” [109]. This author agrees and describes a single mechanism that occurs before aging begins. It suggests that “why and how” senescence starts during the latter half of the post-morphogenetic decade, which exponentially increases aging thereafter. Prior to further discussion of that mechanism, a brief review of current findings and opinions derived from study of the aging phenotype is offered.



[17. Misleading Premise of Current Theories]
Most importantly, if not all damage theories consider that some of the maladaptive conditions associated with the aging phenotype are causal of it, they assume senescence a priori. If, as suggested, aging results from synergistic expression of ongoing, multifactorial, and maladaptive events that accelerate its progression, then they must have been in existence before the cooperative effects actually occur. In other words, the premise that synergy is a “most significant cause of aging” [106,111] is flawed because, like many other aging theories, it requires senescence to have already happened. It does not explain how the aging process begins in the first place.

A common error in logic shared by most biogerontologists relating to whether they favor programmed or non-programmed theories is that their focus is upon the aging phenotype itself. This may seem reasonable, but it is not. Generally, when seeking the cause of an effect, one would not expect to find it after the fact. It is more logical that an action will precede an outcome. This is the case for the cause of aging. Regarding programmed aging, the cause is obviously a program, which must be designed in such a way so as to produce the desired outcome, i.e., ultimately death. While the process (a program) is appropriate, its objective (to end organismal life) violates evolutionary mechanics and, therefore, is untenable. Alternatively, damage-based theories tend to lure investigators to the outcome within which they search for a cause. Aging is a somatic catastrophe that is expected to contain all sorts of damages, malfunctions, disorders, and diseases. However, diseases or pathophysiological disorders are not often considered as basic causes of aging because they are recognized as being products of pathogens or physical degeneration. In other words, they are consequences not causes. Unlike disease, molecular or metabolic stochastic damage is more enticing because it often occurs, at least initially, without overt pathological symptoms and, thus, as seemingly causal candidates for aging itself. Indeed, DNA damages and epigenetic abnormalities are found within the aging phenotype; however, if this is the case, the question concerns whether any can initiate aging in isolation from it. The answer is yes, consistent with Schumacher et al.’s statement that “it remains unknown whether ageing has a unifying causal mechanism or is grounded in multiple sources.” [112]. A central concept of the current theory is that the study of organisms that are already experiencing aging is somewhat illogical since senescence has already occurred and the dynamic process of morpholysis is proceeding.

As a metaphor for the misunderstanding of aging’s cause and effect, imagine a large house standing alone in an open field, unprotected from environmental assaults and out of view by rational beings. Suddenly, the building is severely buffeted by a tornado force wind that appears from nowhere, and then immediately disappears. The building’s structural integrity is totally compromised by the assault to the extent that it is rendered unstable and begins to collapse. Thereupon, observers suddenly appear on the scene to witness the building’s progressive disintegration, unaware of the environmental trauma it previously experienced. They wonder, “what’s causing this structural collapse”? Is it the broken rafters and trusses, the cracked foundation and split supporting beams, opening of a subterranean sinkhole, isolated shifting of a microtectonic plate below the basement, aggressive attack by wood boring insects…anon, anon.”. This ridiculous metaphor is intended to explain how, in biology, the aging body, like the collapsing building, presents its current condition to an observer, as opposed to the prior experience responsible for causing it. Like the collapsing building, a multitude of seemingly possible causes can be observed in the body as it ages; however, none are sufficient in isolation to be the primary reason for its all-consuming and progressive disintegration. Nonetheless, there is the seemingly universal tendency to look at events that occur during aging as a cause of it, as opposed to a consequence. As a result, there is a huge store of information on DNA damage, epigenetic modification, metabolic and mutational events, etc., which all occur during aging. Despite examination and manipulation of the “impressive diversity”of its correlates, only the rate of aging can be altered. Somatic deconstruction is never prevented, and youth is never sustained. This barrier exists for two reasons. Firstly, none of the hallmarks of aging are its primary cause. The second preferable reason is that current technology to selectively block expression of the actual regulatory events that inadvertently initiate senescence and accelerate aging thereafter do not exist. So, for the present, describing the existence of a functional mechanism that causes aging may be sufficient incentive for such technology to be developed.

Consistent with this objective, Ryosuke et al. [44] argue that despite an amalgam of multiple, random detrimental effects being generally accepted, the identification of mutations and other genetic structural changes that affect longevity suggest that particular cellular pathways affect aging. They then recognized that the challenge of understanding the aging process is to determine the underlying mechanistic bases that regulates it. As will be described below, DNA double-stranded break (DSB) damage and the resulting regulatory gene structural change and subsequent transcriptional dysregulation within the developmental regulatory process directing morphostasis are directly involved in the underlying mechanism of aging.

With humility, the author’s previous comments were not intended to besmirch the opinions of those who search within the aging phenotype for its cause or imply that their findings are not of value. Those efforts have generated extensive information on molecular damage and maladaptive metabolic and physiological changes that occur during aging. However, searching for the basic underlying mechanism of aging within its phenotype is folly that will ultimately produce frustration and/or abandonment in favor of efforts to exploit more pragmatic and therapeutic approaches to aging research. In contrast, identifying the mechanism by which aging emerges and progresses may create a means for managing the plethora of pathologies associated with it, before they develop into frank disease states. In other words, the shift in research from applications intended to treat age-related disease to the prevention of it through comprehension of the primary cause may result from understanding the basic mechanism of aging. Accordingly, a central concept of the current theory is that when the effects of DNA DSB damage the morphostasis regulatory mechanism and escape the constraints of NS, maladaptive changes occur in the structure of regulatory ncDNA. This effect alters epigenetic influence over determination of the regulatory mechanism’s “initial conditions”, thereby changing its dynamic behavior that disrupts appropriate regulatory oversight to ultimately initiate senescence.

Of note is that the effects of both DNA damage and epigenetic influences that alter expression of initiating regulatory genes and have primary roles in aging also occur stochastically within aging organisms due to generalized breakdown of local regulatory oversight and control. However, identifying primary participants in the mechanism for aging, as described within this theory, requires an exertion of their maladaptive influence before senescence emerges in the young organism. Prior to describing that proximate mechanism of aging, selected data on aspects epigenetic and DNA damage derived from study of the aging phenotype, and thereby not representing its causal mechanism, are briefly compared and contrasted.



[18. Epigenetics]
Epigenetic dysregulation is considered a key hallmark of the aging process [113]. However, it is not exclusively responsible since genetic impairment and non-genetic, i.e., epigenetic factors, jointly contribute to longevity [114]. If so, this possibility raises a “chicken or egg” question of whether changes in the activity of epigenetic enzymes influence the expression of critical longevity genes or whether alterations in the longevity genes drive large scale epigenetic changes in the genome [113]. Based upon the observation that single-point mutations in epigenetic enzymes dramatically alter the lifespan of lower organisms, it is possible that epigenetic modifications drive age changes. However, since there are many redundant enzyme systems in more complex higher organisms, Sen et al. [113] concluded that having a few genes as drivers of age-related changes is too simplistic an idea. Instead, large-scale changes due to environmental stimuli or nutrient availability were suggested to be primary factors. It is noteworthy to reiterate a point previously made, i.e., that this conclusion was drawn from study of aging subjects.

In any event, cellular phenotypic diversity is explained by epigenetic influences that modify genetic expression. Optimal gene expression is maintained through rounds of cell division due to key, stable epigenetic patterns of DNA methylation and chromatin-based regulation. However, the role of DNA methylation is complex, as it affects gene expression depending upon CpG context [115].

Evidence that CpG island methylation is a true epigenetic mark derives from its stability and self-perpetuation through cell divisions. For example, promoter, gene body, and intergenic methylation are associated with gene silencing, variable effects on gene expression, and enhancer regulation, respectively [116]. However, in other contexts, such as that involving the developmental regulatory mechanism, epigenetic profiles are more dynamic, sometimes following changes in gene expression rather than causing them, thereby not reflecting the stability of a true epigenetic state. This variation is of primary importance in the mechanism subserving the emergence of senescence from morphostasis, since structural alteration of the initiating genetic component that alters subsequent outcome and, thus, the epigenetic state is proposed to specifically result from DSBs. Central to the theory is the importance of mechanistically distinguishing between stable epigenetic expression needed to maintain somatic homeostasis from its dynamic expression in the developmental regulatory mechanism during the various stages of morphogenesis, morphostasis, and morpholysis.

We now consider epigenetic changes in the aging phenotype. Methylation changes occur progressively and linearly, such that hyper- and hypo-methylation within the soma are consistent with a gradual change away from baseline or “drift”. This behavior differs from that which is abrupt or programmed as during expression of the holistic regulatory mechanism. Aging “drift” is most likely due to stochastic errors which cause the imperfect maintenance of epigenetic marks. Based upon these, it is possible to estimate organismal age, by measuring DNA methylation “drift” in peripheral blood and other tissues [117,118]. In this context, a methylation change simply defines differences between two somatic states as in comparing young individuals with old ones. It does not necessarily imply active participation in the regulatory mechanism, nor functional consequences or primary pathology. However, shifts in global methylation can be indicative of physiological and/or pathological changes [119,120]. Since age-associated phenotypes can be ameliorated by epigenetic remodeling during cellular reprogramming, epigenetic dysregulation qualifies as an active participant in driving mammalian aging, without necessarily initiating it [120].

During the early stages of morphogenesis, when a stable environment that minimizes molecular and cellular damage exists, cells undergo spatiotemporally orchestrated differentiation that ultimately generates all the cell types of an adult organism. However, as the organism ages beyond adulthood, the continuous and progressive loss of morphostasis redundancy exacerbates aging. As a result, efficacy of the mechanisms responsible for minimizing cellular damage declines during aging, eventually resulting in an organism’s inability to maintain homeostasis.

Indicative of this process are the many epigenetic marks, such as DNA methylation, post-translationally modified histones, and chromatin, which all change during reprogramming and thereby become dysregulated during aging. By not considering that a primary mechanism of aging also involves genetic and epigenetic elements that regulate morpholysis, epigenetic dysregulation during aging, i.e., not preceding it, has emerged as a hallmark of the process [113]. The important difference between these two processes is that aging is driven by a deterioration of the primary mechanism; thus, global epigenetic dysregulation is a consequence of the aging process, not a cause.

Many of these age-related somatic changes can be ameliorated by increasing the levels of histones, strongly implicating direct transcriptional consequences of histone loss [121]. Genomic stability and chromatin structure are closely intertwined. The latter not only regulates accessibility of DNA damaging agents to the genome, but also participates in critical signaling roles for DNA lesions and their repair [122]. Since chromatin plays a critical role in regulating genomic stability and gene expression, it is possible that such changes may be caused by the global alteration of chromatin structure during aging, as evidenced by the loss of heterochromatin in human cells [123] to a wide-spread reduction in histone levels during mitosis.

To summarize this brief review, epigenetic changes that are directly related to expression of the regulatory mechanism for oversight of various life stages, e.g., morphogenesis, morphostasis, and morpholysis, are different from those associated with somatic maintenance and function, especially during aging.



[19. DNA Damage]
DNA damage and mutations have long been considered key causal events and potentially universal participants in the aging process. Accordingly, putative genome maintenance systems exist to sustain longevity by repairing damage or removing cells, whereby DNA damage is beyond repair [124,125].

Data from humans and animals experiencing some degree of aging support the view that there are many causes, including mitochondrial dysfunction, free radical damage, telomere shortening, cellular senescence, stem cell depletion, and destabilization of energy homeostasis [108].

However, it is generally agreed that none of these effects independently represent the cause of the aging, but rather that they interact in complex ways to erode genomic maintenance by accumulating DNA damage which has adverse phenotypic consequences in adult organisms [126,127]. Supporting that proposal is evidence that genome rearrangements and structural variations, including mutations, deletions, and translocations, occur in somatic tissues and increase with age [128,129].

Because it is a major target of age-related cellular harm, and since human premature aging syndromes are caused by progressive genome instability [45], DNA damage has long been considered a hallmark of aging and a potentially universal participant in its causal mechanism [124,125].

DNA damage results from various intrinsic and extrinsic insults to the soma, generating in humans as many as fifty thousand lesions per day per cell [130]. These lesions include base modifications, single-strand breaks (SSBs), double strand breaks (DSBs), and interstrand cross-links (ICLs). Since DNA damage can interfere with transcription and replication, it can erode cell function and lead to death [127].

The negative effects of DNA damage on genome destabilization are exacerbated by its accumulation due to the functional decline of the DNA damage repair mechanism as aging progresses [131]. In animal models, defects in DNA repair are associated with significantly shorter life spans than long-lived mutants that display increased repair capacity. Similarly, some heritable diseases linked to defective DNA repair or damage processing characteristically display premature aging and early death. Comparable DNA repair defects produced in murine models by genetic modification caused age-related disease phenotypes to emerge [132]. The opinion that accumulated DNA damage associated with defective repair assaults genome integrity is supported by the existence of ubiquitous, dedicated, and energetically expensive repair mechanisms. These exist to correct DNA damage that can disrupt cellular homeostasis and presumably cause aging. Thus, reference is made to recent, relevant reviews for a more comprehensive background on the relationship between DNA damage and aging [112,133].

Although erosion of genome integrity by DNA damage is favored as a basic cause of aging, there is little consensus on which kind is primarily responsible in raising the question “does any one type of damage play a predominant role in causing aging, and if so, which?” [108]. White and Vijg proposed that DSBs are responsible [134].



[20. Double-Stranded Breaks]
DNA DSBs display several characteristics that make them causally relevant to aging [124]. They occur at a rate of about 10 to 50 per cell per day depending on cell cycle and tissue. However, their frequency increases with aging, and they are highly toxic, making them capable of having severely adverse consequences [135]. Defects in their repair underscore the relevance of DSBs to aging by linking such repair with age-related chromatin changes. If unrepaired, they can cause cell death or, if incorrectly repaired, they may produce gene rearrangements [136]. It is this effect of DSBs on gene structure that is directly applicable to disruption of morphostasis redundancy, which initiates senescence in humans as they approach 30 years of age.

DSBs can result from cellular exposure to DNA damaging agents; however, they also occur in a programmed manner during development, generated to initiate recombination between homologous chromosomes during meiosis [137]. They also occur as intermediates during developmentally regulated rearrangements, such as V(D)J recombination and immunoglobulin class switch recombination. When occurring during youth and under normal physiological conditions, adverse outcomes of DSB processing are rare. In fact, they can occasionally be beneficial when involving apoptosis and cellular senescence, which can efficiently remove irreversibly damaged cells or constructively participate in the developmental process, respectively [138,139].

The cumulative maladaptive effects of DSBs, which are different from those specific to initiating the aging mechanism, emerge during aging itself, causing atrophy, inflammation, and immunosenescence. Undoubtedly, these adverse conditions resulting from DSB accumulation are consequences of aging. More relevant to the theory is that DSBs are intrinsic to various biological processes. For example, transcription is a key substrate for translocations, deletions, and amplifications associated with aging and various cancers [140,141].

Changes in DSB processing and repair can independently cause aging, as evidenced by the effects of non-specific, radiation-induced lesions in rodents and humans, as well as by treatment with high doses of anti-cancer agents or by their enzymatic induction [50,134]. These observations suggest that, unlike other DNA damage, DSBs may be capable of driving multiple age-related phenotypes, as part of the aging mechanism.

DSBs also promote epigenetic drift by triggering signals that recruit epigenetic regulators away from gene promoters to the DNA break site [142] and are consistently linked with accelerated aging if defectively repaired [143,144].

In contrast, a survey of long-lived species showed that the efficient repair of DSBs or the inhibited rate of damage was highly correlated with longer lifespan [145]. Thus, DSBs threaten cell viability by compromising integrity of the genome as well as the epigenome.



[21. DNA Damage Response]
Following generation of a DSB, the cell initiates a DNA damage response, consisting of highly orchestrated series of events, during which the two broken DNA ends are reconnected [146]. The two predominant mechanisms for DSB repair are homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In mammals, the DNA damage response (DDR) commonly involves the NHEJ pathway which does not require homologous ends to be joined after minimal processing by nucleases [147]. However, DDR using NHEJ, which is the primary repair mechanism in mammals [148], is error-prone, sometimes causing structural variations, including small base pair deletions and translocations [149].

The improper DSB repair exacerbated with advancing age is exacerbated by the increasing numbers of DSB foci that occur in multiple tissue types, reflecting a possible increase in the accumulation of unrepaired DSBs due to progressively delayed repair events. Delay may occur as a consequence of an inherently limited capacity to process DSBs. The declining age-related capacity of NHEJ throughout the body has been demonstrated in knock-in reporter mice [150]. These changes in DSB processing and repair can independently cause aging, as evidenced by the effects of radiation-induced lesions in rodents and humans, as well as by treatment with high doses of anti-cancer agents. More definitively, mouse models to evaluate the effects of DSBs demonstrated that patterns of liver-related aging pathology were increased, similar to those seen in naturally aged mice [134]. More recently, a transgenic mouse model using the I-PpoI restriction enzyme to induce DSBs [50,151] caused premature holistic aging, discussed as supporting data for the proposed aging theory involving damage to the morphostasis regulatory process. These observations suggest that, unlike other DNA damage, DSBs are independently capable of driving multiple age-related phenotypes as part of the aging mechanism. Furthermore, the quality of DSB repair responses tends to degrade with age, causing increased genome structural variation in older mammals. The diminishing quality of DSB repair that normally occurs, as well as following long-term exposure to agents causing their induction, is associated with premature aging.



[22. DSB Misrepair—Effects on Regulatory Gene Structure]
The improper repair of DSBs by error-prone NHEJ can cause structural variations [148]. Genome rearrangements and structural variations, including mutations, deletions, and translocations, occur in somatic tissues and increase with age [128,129].

The relevance of DSB-induced mutagenesis to the theory is its potential to change the structure of coding genes, causing transcriptional dysregulation, similar to Huntington’s disease (HD) [152]. The same effect can occur in ncDNA, making the maladaptive effect of DSBs on transcriptional dysregulation relevant to the changing behavior of the regulatory mechanism directing morphogeneis as humans approach 30 years of age [153].

Consistent with this concept is the decrease in transcriptional coordination in aging cells associated with high stochastic mutational load and radiation-induced DNA damage that produces DSBs. Thus, transcriptional dysregulation resulting from stochastic events may represent a central and causal attribute of dysfunction in the morphostasis regulatory mechanism, thus leading to aging [154].

A clue to the link between DSB repair and changes in the regulatory mechanism that initiates senescence was provided by White and Viig [134] who summarized data, demonstrating the effects of age on the repair of DSBs. Based upon the observations that genetic defects in DSB repair are associated with premature aging in humans and mice, and that aging accelerates following exposure to radiation, chemotherapeutic agents, or genetic constructs with restriction enzymes, DSBs may play a causal role in driving aging. The authors speculated that DSBs do so through other molecular and cellular end-points, as well as genome structural variations [Figure 6].

These can cause detrimental physiological consequences over time, leading to the progression of aging, disease, and death. The description of the possible products of DSB misrepair has been modified to specifically focus upon structural change in ncDNA that ultimately alters initial conditions for morphostasis regulatory control, thereby changing its behavior to chaotic from determinate, and eroding redundancy with each progressive regulatory cycle in which DSB damage and misrepair occurs.

Because normal DSB repair responses tend to decline during aging, genome structural variations increase. Likewise, multiple premature aging phenotypes can occur very early in life when DSBs are experimentally induced, providing evidence of a cause-and-effect relationship [134]. Specifically, the improper repair of DSBs resulting in maladaptive structural changes in ncDNA could introduce transcriptional dysregulation of regulatory ncRNA to subsequently change initial conditions of the morphostasis regulatory mechanism. This effect shifts regulatory behavior from deterministic to chaotic which then erodes strict redundancy of morphostasis, thus initiating senescence and accelerating the rate of aging.



[23. DSB Involvement in the Theoretical Aging Mechanism]
As shown in Figure 6, the misrepair of DSBs by the DDR can result in genome structural change. An assumption of the theory is that structural changes in genes, setting initial behavioral conditions of the regulatory system during latter morphostasis when the strength of NS wanes, will change the outcome of the segment within which it occurs. Change in outcome will modify epigenetic influence on those affected gene’s expression during the next cycle. Since such change alters initial conditions of subsequent cycles, the determinative behavior of the regulatory mechanism will eventually become chaotic. The change in regulatory behavior will instigate a loss of morphostasis redundancy and thereby initiate senescence. The progressive accumulation of genetic structural change in other parts of the global morphostasis regulatory mechanism exacerbates chaotic behavior, increasing the loss of regulatory redundancy. Then, the driving force of DP regulation exponentially accelerates aging since the number of erroneous regulatory commands approach and exceed those that are correct. Besides explaining why the rate of aging rapidly increases, this effect also explains why the progression of aging appear to be programmatic.

Supporting evidence for this proposal derives from experimental data published by Hayano et al. [50], summarized below.



[24. Supporting Evidence]
Hayano et al. [50] created a transgenic mouse system called Inducible Changes to the Epigenome (ICE) using mature mice ranging in age from 3 to 6 months. The mice selected for study were at “a life phase equivalent for humans ranging
from 20–30 years” [155]. Thus, the study was conducted on mice whose physiological ages were comparable to those of humans during the decade of morphostasis.

The study was designed to determine how experimentally induced DSBs, in conjunction with correlative changes in the epigenome, affect organismal aging. Non-mutagenic DSBs were created in non-coding regions of DNA at frequencies only a few-fold above normal background levels using a homing endonuclease (l-PpoI), encoded by a selfish genetic element from Physarum polycephalum. Initially, ICE mice did not display physiological or molecular changes, nor did they display any advancement of the epigenetic clock [156]. No discernable differences in behavior, activity, or food intake were observed during the three-week l-Ppol induction period, whereas visible differences were observed after one month. When compared with controls, ICE mice displayed common features of middle-aged, wild-type mice, including slight alopecia and loss of pigment on their feet, tails, ears, and noses. Four to six months later, the ICE mice displayed significantly accelerated physiological aging of skin, eye, muscle, and brain. Transcriptional changes associated with acceleration of the epigenetic clock estimated the rate of aging to be about 50% faster than controls. By 10 months of age, gene expression patterns and DNA methylation in ICE and control mice showed that dysregulation of skeletal muscle genes from significantly younger treated mice was positively correlated with that of twenty-four-month-old wild types. Resulting molecular changes in the epigenome included histone modifications, DNA compartmentalization, smoothing of the epigenetic landscape, and loss of cellular identity.

Thus, the cutting of ncDNA in young adult mice rapidly changed their epigenome, which was associated with the initiation and acceleration of aging. Thus, the authors proposed that their findings did not support the generally held damage-based theories that aging is a random multifactorial process; however, instead, it was argued that it is non-random and “potentially driven by reproducible and predictable epigenetic changes”. Based upon the relocalization of chromatin modifiers hypothesis [142], the authors suggested that the repeated misrepair of DSB damage progressively altered the epigenetic landscape to the point where cells remained in a chronically stressed state, eventually disrupting their cellular identity.

While admitting to not knowing the specific reason that aging was accelerated in their model, Hayano et al. speculated that a general mechanism, involving DNA damage, chromatin, and/or transcriptional networks, triggered a feed-forward cascade of “deleterious events” [50], which resembled accelerated aging. Consistent with the concept that aging is never due to changes in a single local system, but instead to generalized deterioration of the soma, they proposed that “DNA damage/repair based loss of epigenetic information [throughout the body] is an upstream cause of mammalian aging”. The ICE data support that premise; however, identification of a naturally occurring process(s) by which the senescence-causing scenario plays out is lacking from their conclusion. This is presented in this paper’s theory. Nonetheless, they provided a preliminary explanation for how a molecular mechanism could cause holistic aging in mammals, suggesting that DSB repair alone accelerates aging at physiological, histological, and molecular levels, as well as accelerating the epigenetic clock.

The authors stated that accelerated aging in the ICE mice was not due to mutations since the number of potentially active genomic elements for the regulatory mechanism was enzymatically eliminated. This view is inconsistent with the report of White and Vijg [134] and the assumption that structural change is one possible effect of DSB damage repair that disrupts normal progression of the morphostasis regulatory mechanism. However, enzymatic cutting of genomic constituents of the regulatory mechanism is functionally the same since the process effectively reduced the number of valid components of the regulatory mechanism that would occur either by mutation or by physical elimination. Nonetheless, there is an operational difference between the progression of morphostasis regulatory expression in the experimentally induced and normally aging mice. The difference involves negative (puifying) selection which participates in the latter condition but not in the former. As previously described, natural aging involves structural change in genetic components of the morphostasis regulatory mechanism. If these were not removed, they would immediately change the initial conditions of the next morphostasis cycle, thereby interrupting system redundancy to some extent. This concern is not immediately relevant to the ICE mice, since their treatment did not cause mutations but instead reduced the number of genetic components participating in redundant morhostasis regulation, according to Hayano et al. [50]. Thus, purifying selection is needed to sustain morphostasis during the natural life span. However, it paradoxically also contributes to aging by reducing damaged components of morphostasis, inadvertently causing eventual loss of redundancy.

Hayano et al. [50] were also to answer some important questions that are addressed in the current theory. For example, they could not explain how “seemingly random events involved in their experimental process appear to behave as if they were part of a program” since instantaneous global damage to ncDNA and its associated negative impact on the epigenome caused aging in a seemingly programmatic and naturally occurring progression, albeit at faster rates. However, the authors did not argue that their findings supported the concept of “programmed aging”, even though they recognized that the effects of treatment on progression of the aging phenotype appeared to be programmatically expressed. Instead, they proposed that instantaneous, widespread, and increased, but non-mutagenic, levels of DNA damage accelerated the epigenetic clock, consistent with increased rates of physiological, cognitive, and molecular aging in their experimental animals. The study identified a molecular driver of epigenetic change during aging and provided convincing preliminary evidence that it affects the aging process. In lieu of providing a detailed mechanistic answer, the authors proposed that DNA damage, independent of mutations, drives the “aging clock”, thus explaining why morpholysis proceeds through a predictable series of molecular and physiological changes. Furthermore, they proposed that their idea provided evidence of a holistic senescence mechanism, despite the random occurrence of DNA damage anywhere in the genome.

Their logic that DNA damage and associated epigenetic changes drive the epigenetic clock implies that the aging process is directed, rather than being its “time keeper”. While there are no published data demonstrating that the “clock” is a driver of aging, Horvath and Raj [157] proposed an epigenetic clock theory that views organismal aging as an unintended consequence of developmental and maintenance programs. These, in turn, provide molecular footprints which act as the basis for age estimation by DNA methylation (DNAm). In other words, rather than being a driving force of aging, DNAm age is a “proximal readout” of all the events innate or otherwise that represent the root causes of aging and ultimately erode cell and tissue function. It is this author’s opinion that the epigentic clock, while serving as a proximal readout of aging’s progression, also reflects the multiple well-recognized consequences of advancing age within the body. Therefore, damage-related acceleration of the epigenetic clock is not the proximate cause described within the current theory; however, instead, it measures the results of aging itself that are widely recognized as being multifactorial. Because epigenetic clocks provide molecular correlates of chronological age in humans and other vertebrates, they could prove useful for evaluating rates of aging, as well as for the efficacy of interventions focused upon rejuvenation and extending lifespan [158].



[25. Discussion and Conclusions]
This theory resolves the century-long debate over whether the cause of aging is an evolved program to ensure determinative lifespan due to accumulated damage within the adult soma. Neither of the historic approaches provide a mechanism which can describe how aging begins and how it exponentially accelerates as mammals approach and transcend middle age.

Relevant to the mechanism of aging that occurs within the proposed process of morphostasis is the fact that the soma is under threat of constant assault by DSB damage to DNA. Presumably, such damage invariably occurs within the morphostasis mechanism, where determinative behavior is only maintained by the strict redundancy of regulatory expression. Since structural alteration is an effect of DSB damage, its occurrence in the regulatory DNA would change the outcome of morphostasis cycles. Since the outcome represents the epigenetic modifier of genetic expression during the subsequent cycle of the regulatory mechanism, the initial conditions of that component of the mechanism, wherever in the body it resides, would be changed. As a result, the strict redundancy of that segment of the morphostasis mechanism would be lost, thereby causing a slight change in overall mechanistic behavior to determinative chaos which would initiate senescence. However, because the accompanying effects of early damage are few, the outcomes of the mechanism retain predictability for a while. Thus, the onset of aging, as represented by an initiation of senescence from morphostasis that occurs in humans at about 30 years of age, is not immediately apparent by obvious phenotypic changes. However, the continued purifying negative selection of polymorphisms, resulting from DSBs within somatic cells over time, increases erosion of morphostasis redundancy, which amplifies the error and exacerbates chaotic behavior within the regulatory mechanism. The accumulation of DSBs within the mechanism occurs randomly within the soma; however, aging is also influenced by inherited and environmental factors that modulate its rate and characteristics between individuals. The combined effects undoubtedly account for differences in aging trajectories between them.

Subtle changes in physical appearance become more apparent during the fourth decade of life and increasingly so during the fifth, since the progressive loss of redundancy accelerates the rate of aging and thus accounts for its typical phenotypic changes. During these decades and beyond, dysregulation of the mechanism promotes disorder within metabolic and physiologic homeostasis control systems, resulting in the emergence and unambiguous expression of the “hallmarks of aging”, which are consequential of the condition, not causal. As a result of these maladaptive effects upon the aging condition, resistance to intrinsic disease significantly decreases, accounting for the common occurrence of cancers, arthritis, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and any number of metabolic disorders when a person reaches their late fifties. Thereafter, surviving individuals progressively become frail, osteoclastic, less resilient, and more vulnerable to communicable diseases. Furthermore, increasing physical damage, such as fractures and internal injuries, result from falls or other accidents due to declining proprioception, vision, and hearing. Eventually, late in life, the exhaustion of the morphostasis redundancy mechanism occurs, allowing any remaining somatic maintenance processes to slightly decelerate the rate of aging. Finally, death is inevitable when tolerance to stresses and physiological fluctuations is no longer possible, causing internal entropy to accumulate as energy throughput irreversibly diminishes.



MESH TERMS: Adult, Aging, Animals, Epigenomics, Genome, Humans, Mammals, Selection, Genetic, Young Adult

KEYWORDS: aging mechanism, chaos, determinism, developmental regulatory behavior, epigenetics, gene expression, initial conditions, morphogenesis, morpholysis, morphostasis

AUTHORS: Richard F. Walker

YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: Cells

================================================================================
DOI: 10.4161/cc.9.16.13120
================================================================================

TITLE: Revisiting the antagonistic pleiotropy theory of aging: TOR-driven program and quasi-program

ABSTRACT: A half century ago, the antagonistic pleiotropy (AP) theory had solved a mystery of aging, by postulating genes beneficial early in life at the cost of aging. Recently it was argued however that there are very few clear-cut examples of antagonistically pleiotropic (AP) genes other than p53. In contrast, here I discuss that p53 is not a clear-cut example of AP genes but is rather an aging-suppressor (gerosuppressor). In contrast, clear-cut examples of AP genes are genes that encode the TOR (target of rapamycin) pathway. TOR itself is the ultimate example of AP gene because its deletion is lethal in embryogenesis. Early in life the TOR pathway drives developmental program, which persists later in life as an aimless quasi-program of aging and age-related diseases.

MESH TERMS: Aging, Antibiotics, Antineoplastic, Caloric Restriction, Genetic Pleiotropy, Signal Transduction, Sirolimus, TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases, Tumor Suppressor Protein p53

AUTHORS: Mikhail V Blagosklonny

YEAR: 2010
JOURNAL: Cell Cycle
